  BACKGROUND: High frequencies of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) are found in familial breast carcinomas with BRCA mutations. Although LOH of BRCA1 does not coincide with somatic BRCA1 mutations, reduced BRCA1 protein expression and hypermethylation indicate the involvement of BRCA1 in sporadic carcinogenesis. To further investigate the role of BRCA we determined LOH of BRCA1 and correlated this with LOH in other breast cancer-associated regions. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 105 sporadic breast carcinomas were analysed for LOH in the regions of BRCA1, BRCA2, TP53, Caveolin1, "putative BRCA3", PTEN, ATM and E-cadherin and correlated it with clinicopathological features. RESULTS: We found an overall increase of LOH in carcinomas with simultaneous LOH of BRCA1. Significantly higher LOH rates were detected in the regions of TP53 (80%: 34.7%; p<0.005), 8q21 (72.7%: 30.6%; p<0.010) and 10q22-23 (21.1%: 5.9%; p=0.043). Moreover, estrogen receptor-negative carcinomas revealed LOH of BRCA1 more frequently than estrogen receptor-positive carcinomas (39%: 12%; p=0.003). CONCLUSION: These data indicate that LOH of BRCA1 coincides with a defect of the DNA repair pathway. Therefore, LOH of BRCA1 determines a subgroup of sporadic breast carcinomas sharing genotype/phenotype features with familial breast carcinomas.
  BACKGROUND: Here we present the first paired-end sequencing of tumors from genetically engineered mouse models of cancer to determine how faithfully these models recapitulate the landscape of somatic rearrangements found in human tumors. These were models of Trp53-mutated breast cancer, Brca1- and Brca2-associated hereditary breast cancer, and E-cadherin (Cdh1) mutated lobular breast cancer. RESULTS: We show that although Brca1- and Brca2-deficient mouse mammary tumors have a defect in the homologous recombination pathway there is no apparent difference in the type or frequency of somatic rearrangements found in these cancers when compared to other mouse mammary cancers, and tumors from all genetic backgrounds showed evidence of micro-homology mediated repair and non-homologous end-joining processes. Importantly mouse mammary tumors were found to carry fewer structural rearrangements than human mammary cancers and expressed in-frame fusion genes. Like the fusion genes found in human mammary tumors these were not recurrent. One mouse tumor was found to contain an internal deletion of exons of the Lrp1b gene, which lead to a smaller in-frame transcript. We found internal in-frame deletions in the human ortholog of this gene in a significant number (4.2%) of human cancer cell lines. CONCLUSIONS: Paired-end sequencing of mouse mammary tumors revealed that they display significant heterogeneity in their profiles of somatic rearrangement, but importantly fewer rearrangements than cognate human mammary tumors, probably because these cancers have been induced by strong driver mutations engineered into the mouse genome. Both human and mouse mammary cancers carry expressed fusion genes and conserved homozygous deletions.
  MYC regulates a myriad of genes controlling cell proliferation, metabolism, differentiation, and apoptosis. MYC also controls the expression of DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair genes and therefore may be a potential target for anticancer therapy to sensitize cancer cells to DNA damage or prevent genetic instability. In this report, we studied whether MYC binds to DSB repair gene promoters and modulates cell survival in response to DNA-damaging agents. Chromatin immunoprecipitation studies showed that MYC associates with several DSB repair gene promoters including Rad51, Rad51B, Rad51C, XRCC2, Rad50, BRCA1, BRCA2, DNA-PKcs, XRCC4, Ku70, and DNA ligase IV. Endogenous MYC protein expression was associated with increased RAD51 and KU70 protein expression of a panel of cancer cell lines of varying histopathology. Induction of MYC in G(0)-G(1) and S-G(2)-M cells resulted in upregulation of Rad51 gene expression. MYC knockdown using small interfering RNA (siRNA) led to decreased RAD51 expression but minimal effects on homologous recombination based on a flow cytometry direct repeat green fluorescent protein assay. siRNA to MYC resulted in tumor cell kill in DU145 and H1299 cell lines in a manner independent of apoptosis. However, MYC-dependent changes in DSB repair protein expression were not sufficient to sensitize cells to mitomycin C or ionizing radiation, two agents selectively toxic to DSB repair-deficient cells. Our results suggest that anti-MYC agents may target cells to prevent genetic instability but would not lead to differential radiosensitization or chemosensitization. Cancer Res; 70(21); OF1-12. ©2010 AACR.
  Background: Tumors with homologous recombination deficiency (HRD), such as BRCA1-associated breast cancers, are not able to reliably repair DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) and are therefore highly sensitive to both DSB-inducing chemotherapy and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors. We have studied markers that may indicate the presence of HRD in HER2-negative breast cancers and related them to neoadjuvant chemotherapy response. Patients and methods: Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), BRCA1 promoter methylation, BRCA1 messenger RNA (mRNA) expression and EMSY amplification were assessed in 163 HER2-negative pretreatment biopsies from patients scheduled for neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Results: Features of BRCA1 dysfunction were frequent in triple-negative (TN) tumors: a BRCA1-like aCGH pattern, promoter methylation and reduced mRNA expression were observed in, respectively, 57%, 25% and 36% of the TN tumors. In ER+ tumors, a BRCA2-like aCGH pattern and the amplification of the BRCA2 inhibiting gene EMSY were frequently observed (43% and 13%, respectively) and this BRCA2-like profile was associated with a better response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Conclusions: Abnormalities associated with BRCA1 inactivation are present in about half of the TN breast cancers but were not predictive of chemotherapy response. In ER+/HER2- tumors, a BRCA2-like aCGH pattern was predictive of chemotherapy response. These findings should be confirmed in independent series.
  Male breast cancer (MBC) is an uncommon disease with a frequency of approximately one in 1000. Due to the rarity of MBC, it is understudied and its etiology is poorly understood. Our objectives are to determine the frequency of pathogenic mutations in BRCA2 and PALB2 in MBC cases and to investigate the correlations between mutation status and cancer phenotypes. Single strand conformation polymorphism analysis, direct sequencing, and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification were employed to screen for mutations in the BRCA2 gene, followed by direct sequencing of the PALB2 gene in BRCA2-negative MBC cases. Pathogenic BRCA2 mutations were identified in 18 of the 115 MBC cases, including four of the ten cases (40%) from breast cancer families and 14 of the 105 cases (13%) unselected for family history of breast cancer. The difference in BRCA2-mutation frequencies between cases with and without family history of breast cancer was not statistically significant (P = 0.145), suggesting that family history is not a strong predictor of carrying a mutation in males. We observed a highly significant association of carrying a pathogenic BRCA2 mutation with high tumor grade (P < 0.001) and a weak association with positive lymph nodes (P < 0.02). Of the 97 BRCA2-negative MBC cases, we identified one PALB2 mutation with confirmed pathogenicity and one mutation predicted to be pathogenic, a prevalence of pathogenic PALB2-mutation of 1-2%. Based on our results and previous studies, genetic testing for BRCA2 should be recommended for any diagnosed MBC case, regardless of family history of breast cancer.
  BACKGROUND: The frequency and characteristics of disease in individuals who concomitantly harbor pathogenic mutations in both BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are not established. Materials and methods: Data were collected from the database of Clalit Health Services National Familial Cancer Consultation Service. Probands referred to this clinical service and their family members are routinely tested for the three Jewish founder mutations (BRCA1:185delAG, 5382insC, BRCA2:6174delT). In addition, carriers identified in a population-based cohort of all cases diagnosed with breast cancer in Israel in 1987-1988 allowed the estimation of the population frequency of this phenomenon. RESULTS: In the clinic-based series of 1191 carriers of mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 belonging to 567 families, 22 males and females (1.85%) from 17 different families (3.0%) were found to harbor two different mutations. These included 18 individuals (1.51%) who concomitantly carried the 185delAG BRCA1 and the 6174delT BRCA2 mutations and four individuals (0.34%) who carried the 5382insC BRCA1 and the 6174delT mutations. All individuals were heterozygote carriers and none had a double mutation of both founder mutations in the BRCA1 gene itself. Seven of the 16 double carrier women (46.7%) had a personal history of breast carcinoma, diagnosed at a mean age of 44.6, compared with 372/926 (40.2%) carriers of a single mutation diagnosed with a mean age at diagnosis of 48.1 [odds ratio (OR) = 1.3, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.4-4.0]. One case (6.7%) had a personal history of ovarian carcinoma diagnosed at the age of 53 compared with 55/926 (5.9%) of the women with single mutation (OR = 1.1, CI = 0.2-7.6). The frequency of double mutations in the population-based national breast cancer cohort was 2.2% of all carriers, and 0.3% of all breast cancer cases in the Ashkenazi population in the cohort. The mean age at diagnosis of breast cancer was younger in the carriers of two mutations. CONCLUSION: Double carriers of mutations in the BRCA genes are rare and seem to be carrying a similar probability of developing breast and ovarian cancers as carriers of single mutations.

  Background Germline mutations in CDH1 are associated with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer; lobular breast cancer also occurs excessively in families with such condition. Method To determine if CDH1 is a susceptibility gene for lobular breast cancer in women without a family history of diffuse gastric cancer, germline DNA was analysed for the presence of CDH1 mutations in 318 women with lobular breast cancer who were diagnosed before the age of 45&emsp14;years or had a family history of breast cancer and were not known, or known not, to be carriers of germline mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2. Cases were ascertained through breast cancer registries and high-risk cancer genetic clinics (Breast Cancer Family Registry, the kConFab and a consortium of breast cancer genetics clinics in the United States and Spain). Additionally, Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification was performed for 134 cases to detect large deletions. Results No truncating mutations and no large deletions were detected. Six non-synonymous variants were found in seven families. Four (4/318 or 1.3%) are considered to be potentially pathogenic through in vitro and in silico analysis. Conclusion Potentially pathogenic germline CDH1 mutations in women with early-onset or familial lobular breast cancer are at most infrequent.
  ABSTRACT In this study, MLPA assay was performed for detection of large rearrangements of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in 16 familial, 29 early onset, 3 male breast cancer, and 2 bilateral breast/ovarian cancer high risk Turkish index cases. MLPA assay for all exons of both genes and for 1100delC variant of CHEK2 gene were performed. Analyses, revealed no large genomic rearrangements in both genes, and, no 1100del variant in CHEK2 gene. Our data which represents the first results for Turkish patients, suggest that, the frequency of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes&#x2019; large rearrangements is very low.
  BACKGROUND: Germline mutations in the tumor suppressor genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 are identified in less than 50% of hereditary breast cancer cases. Besides BRCA1/2 further high-risk breast cancer genes are known; however they account only for a small fraction of inherited breast cancer cases. Most of them are involved in rare cancer predisposition syndromes. Moderate and low-risk breast cancer genes confer modest cancer risk up to 10% and may be more relevant due to polygenic inheritance. The majority of hereditary breast cancer cases are still caused by unknown genes. CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: Genetic testing of other known genes is not yet routinely performed in families tested negative for BRCA1/2-mutations, but can be recommended in special patients. In case of a calculated high-risk situation, participation in an early-detection screening program should be recommended. CONCLUSIONS: Genetic susceptibility to breast cancer is heterogeneous and conferred by a large number of identified and yet undetected genes.
  We report an adult male with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome and a germline BRCA2 mutation who developed T-cell monoclonal lymphoid proliferation involving the skin and a polyclonal proliferation of a retroperitoneal lymph node without any identifiable infectious and inflammatory causes. This is the first report of reactive lymphoid hyperplasia in the setting of co-occurrence of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome and a BRCA2 mutation. Further cases with a similar presentation should be reported and studies should be directed to identify the possible mechanisms involved.
  The responsibility for informing at-risk relatives of the availability of genetic testing for breast/ovarian cancer gene (BRCA1 or BRCA2) mutations currently falls on the probands. This study explored the support needs of individuals from families with identified BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations when communicating about genetic risk and genetic testing with at-risk family members. Thirty-nine semi-structured telephone interviews were conducted with individuals from families with identified BRCA mutations. Interview responses were cross-tabulated by sample characteristics using the qualitative research analysis software NVivo8. The development of educational materials, which individuals could use when communicating the risks of carrying a BRCA gene mutation with their relatives, was identified as a specific need. Many participants expressed a preference for a staged approach, where relatives are notified of their increased risk and the availability of genetic testing risk either face-to-face or via a letter, with additional educational sources, including brief written information or access to a website, made available for those wishing to access more in-depth information. This research identified a need for the development of educational/informational resources to support individuals with identified breast/ovarian cancer mutations to communicate with their at-risk relatives about genetic risk and genetic testing availability.
  Heterozygous germ line mutations in the Breast CAncer1 (BRCA1) and BRCA2 genes can lead to a high risk of breast and ovarian cancer, in addition to a significantly increased susceptibility of pancreatic, prostate and male breast cancer. The BRCA2 belongs to the tumor suppressor gene family and the protein encoded by this gene is involved in the repair of chromosomal damage, with an important role in the error-free repair of DNA double strand breaks. After complete sequencing of coding regions and splice junctions of both genes, in a family with breast cancer history, a non previously reported heterozygous mutation in BRCA2 was detected and studied in an Italian healthy female. The direct sequencing disclosed, on exon 15, an insertion (7525_7526insT). The frame shift mutation of BRCA2 causes a disruption of the translational reading frame, resulting in a stop codon 29 amino acids downstream, in the 2538 position of the BRCA2 protein. The mutated allele codifies a truncated protein, lacking the two putative nuclear localization signals (NLSs) that reside within the extreme C-terminal domain of BRCA2. Since this mutant protein not performs a translocation into the nucleus, it is fully non-functional.
  BACKGROUND: The BRCA2 gene is responsible for a high number of hereditary breast and ovarian cancers, and studies of the BRCA2 biological functions are limited by the lack of models that resemble the patient's tumour features. The aim of this study was to establish and characterise a new human breast carcinoma xenograft obtained from a woman carrying a germline BRCA2 mutation. METHODS: A transplantable xenograft was obtained by grafting a breast cancer sample into nude mice. The biological and genetic profiles of the xenograft were compared with that of the patient's tumour using histology, immunohistochemistry (IHC), BRCA2 sequencing, comparative genomic hybridisation (CGH), and qRT-PCR. Tumour response to standard chemotherapies was evaluated. RESULTS: Histological profile identified the tumour as a basal-like triple-negative breast cancer. Targeted BRCA2 DNA sequencing of the xenograft showed the presence of the mutation previously identified in the carrier. Comparative genomic hybridisation array profiles of the primary tumour and the xenograft revealed a high number of similar genetic alterations. The therapeutic assessment of the xenograft showed sensitivity to anthracyclin-based chemotherapy and resistance to docetaxel. The xenograft was also highly sensitive to radiotherapy and cisplatin-based treatments. CONCLUSIONS: This study describes a new human breast cancer xenograft obtained from a BRCA2-mutated patient. This xenograft provides a new model for the pre-clinical drug development and for the exploration of the drug response biological basis.
  BACKGROUND: Little is known regarding cancer risks for relatives of women with very early-onset breast cancer. METHODS: We studied 2208 parents and siblings of 504 unselected population-based Caucasian women with breast cancer diagnosed before age 35 years (103 from USA, 124 from Canada and 277 from Australia), 41 known to carry a mutation (24 in BRCA1, 16 in BRCA2 and one in both genes). Cancer-specific standardised incidence ratios (SIRs) were estimated by comparing the number of affected relatives (50% verified overall) with that expected based on incidences specific for country, sex, age and year of birth. RESULTS: For relatives of carriers, the female breast cancer SIRs were 13.13 (95% CI 6.57-26.26) and 12.52 (5.21-30.07) for BRCA1 and BRCA2, respectively. The ovarian cancer SIR was 12.38 (3.1-49.51) for BRCA1 and the prostate cancer SIR was 18.55 (4.64-74.17) for BRCA2. For relatives of non-carriers, the SIRs for female breast, prostate, lung, brain and urinary cancers were 4.03 (2.91-5.93), 5.25 (2.50-11.01), 7.73 (4.74-12.62), 5.19 (2.33-11.54) and 4.35 (1.81-10.46), respectively. For non-carriers, the SIRs remained elevated and were statistically significant for breast and prostate cancer when based on verified cancers. CONCLUSION: First-degree relatives of women with very early-onset breast cancer are at increased risk of cancers not explained by BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations.
  BACKGROUND: Increasingly, women with a strong family history of breast cancer are seeking genetic testing as a starting point to making significant decisions regarding management of their cancer risks. Individuals who are found to be carriers of a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation have a substantially elevated risk for breast cancer and are frequently faced with the decision of whether to undergo risk-reducing mastectomy. OBJECTIVE: In order to provide BRCA1/2 carriers with ongoing decision support for breast cancer risk management, a computer-based interactive decision aid was developed and tested against usual care in a randomized controlled trial. DESIGN: . Following genetic counseling, 214 female (aged 21-75 years) BRCA1/2 mutation carriers were randomized to usual care (UC; n = 114) or usual care plus decision aid (DA; n = 100) arms. UC participants received no further intervention; DA participants were sent the CD-ROM-based decision aid to view at home. Main Outcome MEASURES: The authors measured general distress, cancer-specific distress, and genetic testing-specific distress at 1-, 6-, and 12-month follow-up time points postrandomization. RESULTS: Longitudinal analyses revealed a significant longitudinal impact of the DA on cancer-specific distress (B = 5.67, z = 2.81, P = 0.005), which varied over time (DA group by time; B = -2.19, z = -2.47, P = 0.01), and on genetic testing-specific distress (B = 5.55, z = 2.46, P = 0.01), which also varied over time (DA group by time; B = -2.46, z = -2.51, P = 0.01). Individuals randomized to UC reported significantly decreased distress in the month following randomization, whereas individuals randomized to the DA maintained their postdisclosure distress over the short term. By 12 months, the overall decrease in distress between the 2 groups was similar. CONCLUSION: This report provides new insight into the long-term longitudinal effects of DAs.
  The pathogenesis of ovarian, fallopian tube, and peritoneal cancers has been difficult to elucidate despite intense effort. Recently, though, the care of women felt to be at high risk due to a strong family history of breast and/or ovarian cancer or a known germline BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation has provided potential insight into the development of these malignancies. Risk-reducing surgical removal of the fallopian tubes and ovaries, called risk-reducing bilateral salpingo-oopherectomy (RRBSO), is commonly performed as a laparoscopic procedure to minimize recovery time. We describe here an optimized surgical sampling workflow for analyzing the proteomes of peritoneal, fallopian tube, and ovarian surface epithelial (OSE) specimens collected at the time of laparoscopic RRBSO, a technique which has not been described previously. This methodology presents a unique opportunity for closer examination of the proteomic alterations in the tissues at risk for malignant transformation in women with an inherited susceptibility to ovarian, fallopian tube, and peritoneal cancer development.
  A recent genome-wide association study (GWAS) found significant association between the PALB2 SNP rs420259 and bipolar disorder (BD). The intracellular functions of the expressed proteins from the breast cancer risk genes PALB2 and BRCA2 are closely related. Therefore, we investigated the relation between genetic variants in PALB2 and BRCA2 and BD. Due to increasing evidence of genetic overlap between BD and schizophrenia (SCZ), we also investigated association with SCZ. In a Scandinavian case-control sample (n = 686/2,538) we found the BRCA2 SNP rs9567552 to be significantly associated with BD (Nominal P = 0.00043). Additionally, we replicated the association between PALB2 SNP rs420259 and BD (Nominal P = 0.025). We then combined our sample with another Nordic case-control sample (n = 435/11,491) from Iceland, and added results from the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium (WTCCC) (n = 1,868/2,938) and the STEP-UCL/ED-DUB-STEP2 study (n = 2,558/3,274) in a meta-analysis which revealed a P-value of 1.2 × 10(-5) for association between PALB2 SNP rs420259 and BD (n = 5,547/20,241). Neither the PALB2 SNP rs420259 nor the BRCA2 SNP rs9567552 were nominally significantly associated with the SCZ phenotype in our Scandinavian sample (n = 781/2,839). Our findings support PALB2 and BRCA2 as risk genes specifically for BD, and suggest that altered DNA repair related to neurogenesis may be involved in BD pathophysiology. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
  Homologous recombination mediated by RAD51 recombinase helps eliminate chromosomal lesions, such as DNA double-strand breaks induced by radiation or arising from injured DNA replication forks. The tumor suppressors BRCA2 and PALB2 act together to deliver RAD51 to chromosomal lesions to initiate repair. Here we document a new function of PALB2: to enhance RAD51's ability to form the D loop. We show that PALB2 binds DNA and physically interacts with RAD51. Notably, although PALB2 alone stimulates D-loop formation, it has a cooperative effect with RAD51AP1, an enhancer of RAD51. This stimulation stems from the ability of PALB2 to function with RAD51 and RAD51AP1 to assemble the synaptic complex. Our results demonstrate the multifaceted role of PALB2 in chromosome damage repair. Because PALB2 mutations can cause cancer or Fanconi anemia, our findings shed light on the mechanism of tumor suppression in humans.
  Inherited mutations in human PALB2 are associated with a predisposition to breast and pancreatic cancers. PALB2's tumor-suppressing effect is thought to be based on its ability to facilitate BRCA2's function in homologous recombination. However, the biochemical properties of PALB2 are unknown. Here we show that human PALB2 binds DNA, preferentially D-loop structures, and directly interacts with the RAD51 recombinase to stimulate strand invasion, a vital step of homologous recombination. This stimulation occurs through reinforcing biochemical mechanisms, as PALB2 alleviates inhibition by RPA and stabilizes the RAD51 filament. Moreover, PALB2 can function synergistically with a BRCA2 chimera (termed piccolo, or piBRCA2) to further promote strand invasion. Finally, we show that PALB2-deficient cells are sensitive to PARP inhibitors. Our studies provide the first biochemical insights into PALB2's function with piBRCA2 as a mediator of homologous recombination in DNA double-strand break repair.
  The tubal p53 signature is a putative precursor to pelvic serous carcinoma, but its frequencies in women with inherited mutations in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes (BRCA+) and controls has been controversial. An initial section and two levels (100-200 μm) from every block in BRCA+ (24) and control tubes (40) were stained for p53. The frequency of p53 signatures was computed between the populations and across the three levels from each block, and analyzed by Fisher exact test. A total of 17 (71%) BRCA+ and 20 (50%) control tubes were p53 signature positive (P=0.12); 21 and 16% of all tissue blocks sectioned harbored signatures (P=0.29), and 76 and 67% were found in the fimbria. In 49 and 32% of p53 signature positive cases in the two groups, the p53 signatures were not discovered until the second or third round of sectioning. In all, 38 and 40% of BRCA+ and control subjects harbored p53 signatures in more than one focus in a single block. In one case (BRCA+), a highly atypical proliferation was identified in one serial section. The p53 signatures are more common than previously reported and the frequency of detection increases as a function of sectioning through the tissue block, both in absolute frequency and in numbers of p53 signatures detected in a given block. There is a trend for a higher absolute frequency of p53 signatures (71 vs 50%; P=0.12) in BRCA+ subjects, but this is not reflected in a greater average number of p53 signatures or positive blocks per case. This study underscores the importance of systematic immunohistochemical examination of fallopian tubes when conducting epidemiological studies that compare the frequency of p53 signatures in different populations. Attention to this detail is critical when exploring risk factors germane to early serous carcinogenesis.Modern Pathology advance online publication, 24 September 2010; doi:10.1038/modpathol.2010.171.
  The distribution of BRCA1/2 germline mutations in breast/ovarian cancer (BC/OC) families varies among different populations. In the Chilean population, there are only two reports of mutation analysis of BRCA1/2, and these included a low number of BC and/or OC patients. Moreover, the prevalence of BRCA1/2 genomic rearrangements in Chilean and in other South American populations is unknown. In this article, we present the mutation-detection data corresponding to a set of 326 high-risk families analyzed by conformation-sensitive gel electrophoresis and heteroduplex analysis. To determine the contribution of BRCA1/2 LGRs in Chilean BC patients, we analyzed 56 high-risk subjects with no pathogenic BRCA1/2 point mutations. Germline BRCA1/2 point mutations were found in 23 (7.1%) of the 326 Chilean families. Families which had at least three BC and/or OC cases showed the highest frequency of mutations (15.9%). We identified 14 point pathogenic mutations. Three recurrent mutations in BRCA1 (c.187_188delAG, c.2605_2606delTT, and c.3450_3453delCAAG) and three in BRCA2 (c.4969_4970insTG, c.5374_5377delTATG, and c.6503_6504delTT) contributed to 63.6 and 66.7% of all the deleterious mutations of each gene, which may reflect the presence of region-specific founder effects. Taken together BRCA1/2 recurrent point mutations account for 65.2% (15/23) of the BRCA1/2 (+) families. No large deletions or duplications involving BRCA1/2 were identified in a subgroup of 56 index cases negative for BRCA1/2 point mutations. Our study, which is the largest conducted to date in a South American population, provides a comprehensive analysis on the type and distribution of BRCA1/2 mutations and allelic variants.
  Partner and localizer of BRCA2 (PALB2) was originally identified as a BRCA2-interacting protein that is crucial for key BRCA2 genome caretaker functions. It subsequently became clear that PALB2 was another Fanconi anemia (FA) gene (FANCN), and that monoallelic PALB2 mutations are associated with increased risk of breast and pancreatic cancer. Mutations in PALB2 have been identified in breast cancer families worldwide, and recent studies have shown that PALB2 also interacts with BRCA1. Here, we summarize the molecular functions and clinical phenotypes of this key DNA repair pathway component and discuss how its discovery has advanced our knowledge of both FA and adult cancer predisposition.
  High-resolution melting (HRM) of DNA is a versatile method for mutation scanning that monitors the fluorescence of double-strand DNA with saturating dye. Performing HRM on a real-time thermocycler enables semiquantitative analysis (quantitative polymerase chain reaction, qPCR) to be associated to HRM analysis for detection of both large gene rearrangements and point mutations (qPCR-HRM). We evaluated this method of mutation screening for the two major breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility genes BRCA1 and BRCA2. Screening of these two genes is time-consuming and must include exploration of large rearrangements that represent 5% to 15% of the alterations observed in these genes. To assess the reliability of the HRM technology, 201 known nucleotide variations scattered over all amplicons were tested. The sensitivity of qPCR was evaluated by analyzing seven large rearrangements. All previously identified variants tested were detected by qPCR-HRM. A retrospective study was done with 45 patients: qPCR-HRM allowed all the variants previously tested by denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography to be identified. qPCR analysis showed three cases of allele dropout (due to a 104-bp deletion, SNP primer mismatch, and an Alu insertion). A prospective study was done with 165 patients allowing 22 deleterious mutations, 16 unclassified variants, and 2 rearrangements to be detected. qPCR-HRM is a simple, sensitive, and fast method that does not require modified PCR primers. Thus, this method allows in one step the detection of point mutation, gene rearrangements, and prevention of missing a mutation due to primer mismatch.
  Rare germline monoallelic mutations in PALB2 confer a relative risk of breast cancer of 2 to 4-times. To better define the role of PALB2 in breast cancer susceptibility in Italian breast or breast-ovarian cancer families we screened 95 index cases negative for BRCA1/BRCA2 germline mutations. The mutational analysis of the PALB2 gene in a index case of an high risk breast cancer family, has identified a frameshift mutation (c.1517delG) in the exon 4 that leads to the formation of a stop codon, 12 residues downstream of the mutation (Leu451X). The mutation was identified in a woman 52 year old with an infiltrating ductal breast carcinoma and in two of the three sisters without breast cancer. Our results confirmed that PALB2 could be a susceptibility gene for familial breast cancer also in Italian population.
  OBJECTIVES: The genes associated with familial Endometrial Cancer (EC) are largely unknown. While EC is an integral part of Hereditary Non-Polyposis Colon Cancer, there is an ongoing debate if EC is indeed overrepresented in hereditary breast/ovarian cancer families. METHODS: Unselected Jewish women with EC who were diagnosed from January1982 to January 2008 were genotyped for the predominant mutations in Jewish individuals in BRCA1 (185delAG, 5382InsC, Tyr978X) BRCA2 (6174delT), MSH2 (A636P, 324delCA) and MSH6 (c.3984_3987dup). RESULTS: Overall, 289 Jewish women with EC were included, the majority (217-75%) were Ashkenazim. Mean age at diagnosis was 62.6±12years, the most common histopathology was type I (endometrioid carcinoma) (80.4% of participants) with 29 having type II (Uterine papillary serous and clear cell cancer) Most patients (85.4%) had stage 1 disease by the FIGO staging. Five women (1.7%-2.3% of the Ashkenazim) carried either the BRCA1*185delAG (n=4) or BRCA2*6174delT (n=1) mutations, a rate similar with that of the general Ashkenazi population. Notably, none of 34 women with type II EC carried any BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations. Four (1.8%) and three (1.4%) of the 217 Ashkenazim patients harbored the c.3984_3987dup, A636P, MSH6 and MSH2 mutations, respectively, and 1/72 (1.4%) of the non-Ashkenazi patients harbored the 324delCA MSH2 mutation. Three of 42 (7.1%) women with EC diagnosed <50years carried either BRCA1 MSH6 or MSH2 mutations. CONCLUSIONS: Our data do not support screening for BRCA1/2 mutations in consecutive EC patients.
  Hereditary factors are responsible for 5-10% of all breast cancers and 10% of all ovarian cancer cases and are predominantly caused by mutations in the high risk genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 (BRCA: breast cancer). Additional moderate and low penetrance gene variants are currently being analyzed via whole genome association studies. Interdisciplinary counseling, quality managed genetic testing and intensified prevention efforts in specialized medical centres are essential for members of high risk families considering the high prevalence of malignant tumors and the early age of onset. Furthermore, the identification of BRCA-deficient carcinomas is of particular clinical interest, especially regarding new specific therapeutic options, e.g. treatment with poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors. There are presently no valid surrogate markers verifying the association of BRCA1/BRC2 in tumors. However, breast cancers harboring pathogenic BRCA1 mutations in particular display specific histopathological features.
  AIMS AND BACKGROUND: The aim of the study was to investigate the growth rate of inherited breast cancer, to analyze its T2 signal intensity besides kinetic and morphologic aspects, and to verify whether there is any correlation between magnetic resonance imaging phenotype and BRCA status. METHODS: Between June 2000 and September 2009, we enrolled 227 women at high genetic risk for breast cancer in a surveillance program, within a multicenter project of the Istituto Superiore di Sanità (Rome). RESULTS: Thirty-four cancers were detected among 31 subjects. One patient refused magnetic resonance imaging because of claustrophobia. Compared with sporadic disease, hereditary cancer showed some differences, in terms of biologic attitude and semeiotic patterns. These differences were mainly registered for magnetic resonance imaging, where the most frequent radiological variant was represented by the very high T2 signal intensity (73%). Moreover, the size of 8 of the neoplasms showed a significant increase in less than one year, 5 of them in less than 6 months. Six lesions were in BRCA1 patients and the remaining in BRCA2. Furthermore, cancers with a high growth rate also demonstrated a significant increment in T2 signal intensity. CONCLUSIONS: Our results confirmed the high growth rate within BRCA-related breast cancers, especially for BRCA1 mutation carriers. In our experience, we found a specific imaging phenotype, represented by the high T2 signal intensity of hereditary breast cancer. To our knowledge, this is the first report that points out this new semeiotic parameter, which is usually typical of benign lesions. Considering the correlation between high growth rate and high T2 signal intensity, the former seems to be related to the absence of induction of a desmoplastic reaction that could somehow restrict cancer growth.
  BACKGROUND: BRCA1 gene inactivation causes chromosomal instability, leading to rapid accumulation of chromosomal rearrangements and mutations. The loss of BRCA1 function due to either germline/somatic mutation or epigenetic silencing is observed in most high-grade serous carcinomas of the ovary. METHODS: DNA ploidy and gene expression profile were used in order to compare gross genomic alteration and gene expression pattern between cases with BRCA1 loss through mutation, BRCA1 epigenetic loss, and no BRCA1 loss in cases of high-grade serous carcinoma with known BRCA1 and BRCA 2 status. RESULTS: Using image cytometry and oligonucleotide microarrays, we analyzed DNA ploidy, S-phase fraction and gene expression profile of 28 consecutive cases of ovarian high-grade serous adenocarcinomas, which included 8 tumor samples with BRCA1 somatic or germline mutation, 9 samples with promoter hypermethylation of BRCA1, and 11 samples with no BRCA1 loss. None had BRCA2 mutations. The prevalence of aneuploidy and tetraploidy was not statistically different in the three groups with different BRCA1 status. The gene expression profiles were also very similar between the groups, with only two genes showing significant differential expression when comparison was made between the group with BRCA1 mutation and the group with no demonstrable BRCA1 loss. There were no genes showing significant differences in expression when the group with BRCA1 loss through epigenetic silencing was compared to either of the other two groups. CONCLUSIONS: In this series of 28 high-grade serous carcinomas, gross genomic alteration characterized by aneuploidy did not correlate with BRCA1 status. In addition, the gene expression profiles of the tumors showed negligible differences between the three defined groups based on BRCA1 status. This suggests that all ovarian high-grade serous carcinomas arise through oncogenic mechanisms that result in chromosomal instability, irrespective of BRCA status; the molecular abnormalities underlying this in the BRCA intact tumors remains unknown.
  Study Type - Diagnostic (validating cohort) Level of Evidence 1b OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the role of targeted prostate cancer screening in men with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations, an international study, IMPACT (Identification of Men with a genetic predisposition to ProstAte Cancer: Targeted screening in BRCA1/2 mutation carriers and controls), was established. This is the first multicentre screening study targeted at men with a known genetic predisposition to prostate cancer. A preliminary analysis of the data is reported. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Men aged 40-69 years from families with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations were offered annual prostate specific antigen (PSA) testing, and those with PSA >3 ng/mL, were offered a prostate biopsy. Controls were men age-matched (± 5 years) who were negative for the familial mutation. RESULTS: In total, 300 men were recruited (205 mutation carriers; 89 BRCA1, 116 BRCA2 and 95 controls) over 33 months. At the baseline screen (year 1), 7.0% (21/300) underwent a prostate biopsy. Prostate cancer was diagnosed in ten individuals, a prevalence of 3.3%. The positive predictive value of PSA screening in this cohort was 47·6% (10/21). One prostate cancer was diagnosed at year 2. Of the 11 prostate cancers diagnosed, nine were in mutation carriers, two in controls, and eight were clinically significant. CONCLUSIONS: The present study shows that the positive predictive value of PSA screening in BRCA mutation carriers is high and that screening detects clinically significant prostate cancer. These results support the rationale for continued screening in such men.
  DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) induced during clinical radiotherapy are potent inducers of cell death. Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP)-1 is a 113-kD nuclear protein that binds to both single- and double-strand DNA breaks and is actively involved in DNA single-strand break repair and base excision repair. Recently, potent and specific chemical inhibitors of PARP activity have been developed that are effective tumor cell radiosensitizers in vitro and in vivo. Because of synthetic lethality, PARP inhibitors may be highly effective as a single agent in patients whose tumors have germline or somatic defects in DNA damage and repair genes (eg, ATM, BRCA1, BRCA2, and NBS1) or defects in genes involved in phosphatase and tensin homolog gene (PTEN) signaling. Defects in specific DNA repair pathways also appear to enhance the radiosensitizing effects of PARP inhibition. In addition to inherent genetics, tumor cells may also be preferentially sensitized to radiotherapy by diverse mechanisms, including proliferation-dependent radiosensitization, targeting of the endothelium and tumor vasculature, and increased sensitivity to PARP inhibitors within repair-deficient hypoxic cells. Because biologically active doses of PARP inhibitors caused minimal toxicity in phase I to II clinical trials, careful scheduling of these agents in combination with radiotherapy may maintain the therapeutic ratio and increase tumor radiocurability.
  Topoisomerase II (Top2) is a nuclear enzyme involved in several metabolic processes of DNA. Chemotherapy agents that poison Top2 are known to induce persistent protein-mediated DNA double strand breaks (DSB). In this report, by using knock down experiments, we demonstrated that Top2alpha was largely responsible for the induction of gammaH2AX and cytotoxicity by the Top2 poisons idarubicin and etoposide in normal human cells. As DSB resulting from Top2 poisons-mediated damage may be repaired by non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) or homologous recombination (HR), we aimed to analyze both DNA repair pathways. We found that DNA-PKcs was rapidly activated in human cells, as evidenced by autophosphorylation at serine 2056, following Top2-mediated DNA damage. The chemical inhibition of DNA-PKcs by wortmannin and vanillin resulted in an increased accumulation of DNA DSB, as evaluated by the comet assay. This was supported by a hypersensitive phenotype to Top2 poisons of Ku80- and DNA-PKcs- defective Chinese hamster cell lines. We also showed that Rad51 protein levels, Rad51 foci formation and sister chromatid exchanges were increased in human cells following Top2-mediated DNA damage. In support, BRCA2- and Rad51C- defective Chinese hamster cells displayed hypersensitivity to Top2 poisons. The analysis by immunofluorescence of the DNA DSB repair response in synchronized human cell cultures revealed activation of DNA-PKcs throughout the cell cycle and Rad51 foci formation in S and late S/G2 cells. Additionally, we found an increase of DNA-PKcs-mediated residual repair events, but not Rad51 residual foci, into micronucleated and apoptotic cells. Therefore, we conclude that in human cells both NHEJ and HR are required, with cell cycle stage specificity, for the repair of Top2-mediated reversible DNA damage. Moreover, NHEJ-mediated residual repair events are more frequently associated to irreversibly damaged cells.
  DSS1 is a small, highly acidic protein widely conserved among eukaryotes as a component of the 19S proteasome and implicated in ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis. The BRCA2 tumor suppressor protein functions in homologous recombinational repair (HRR) of DNA double-strand breaks, and does so in part through the actions of a carboxy-proximal region that binds DNA and several other proteins, including DSS1. In the unicellular eukaryote Ustilago maydis, Dss1 interacts with Brh2, a BRCA2-like protein, and regulates its function in mediating HRR. We used RNA interference to deplete DSS1 in human cells, and assayed the effects on double-strand break repair by homologous recombination. Partial depletion of DSS1 protein in human cells reduced the efficiency of HRR to small fractions of normal levels. Residual HRR activity correlated roughly with the residual level of DSS1 expression. The results imply that mammalian DSS1 makes a critical contribution to the function of BRCA2 in mediating HRR, and hence to genomic stability. Activity of the ubiquitin-proteasome system can influence HRR. However, treatment with proteasome inhibitors only partially reproduced the effects of DSS1 depletion on HRR, suggesting that the function of DSS1 in HRR involves more than proteolysis per se.
  A small, but important, percentage of breast cancer cases is caused by the inheritance of a single copy of a mutated gene. BRCA1 and BRCA2 are the genes most commonly associated with inherited breast cancer; however, mutations in TP53 and PTEN cause Li-Fraumeni syndrome and Cowden syndrome, respectively, both of which are associated with high lifetime risks of breast cancer. Advances in the field of breast cancer genetics have led to an improved understanding of detection and prevention strategies. More recently, strategies to target the underlying genetic defects in BRCA1- and BRCA2-associated breast and ovarian cancers are emerging and may have implications for certain types of sporadic breast cancer.
  The heterogeneity of multiple case breast cancer families that do not carry mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 (non-BRCA1/2 families) poses a challenge to the identification of breast cancer susceptibility genes. The aim of this study was to determine whether intrafamilial concordance in breast cancer pathology could identify subgroups of non-BRCA1/2 families with consistent genotypic features. Invasive breast cancers were reviewed from 84 individuals belonging to 30 multiple-case families; BRCA1 (n = 9), BRCA2 (n = 10), and non-BRCA1/2 (n = 11). Hierarchical cluster analysis based on histopathology and age at first diagnosis was then used to specify three subgroups designated Clusters 1-3. The genomic features of non-BRCA1/2 families were examined by genome wide linkage and FGFR2 SNP genotyping, according to whether they showed cluster-concordant or cluster-mixed familial pathology. The majority of pathogenic BRCA1 mutation carriers (80%) fell into a single cluster. In contrast pathogenic BRCA2 mutation carriers were distributed across all three clusters and within families, cluster groups were also generally mixed. Most non-BRCA1/2 mutation carriers belonged to Cluster 3 (71%). Genome wide linkage data from five non-BRCA1/2 Cluster 3-concordant families were compared with four mixed cluster non-BRCA1/2 families. This revealed a number of distinct linkage peaks, including some regions previously associated with breast cancer susceptibility. The distribution of low risk alleles in FGFR2 was not different between these two subgroups (P = 0.237). The pattern of breast cancer pathology concordance amongst family members may assist the investigation of breast cancer susceptibility in multiple case families. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
  The recent explosion of hereditary breast cancer genetic research has strengthened our understanding of genetic influences on health and disease. These scientific advances have significant implications for clinical oncology nurses and advanced practice nurses. In this paper, the Human Response to Illness Model (Mitchell, Gallucci, & Fought, 1991) is utilized to gain a comprehensive understanding of breast cancer related to the human response of genetic mutations. Accordingly, the research literature related to the physiological, pathophysiological, behavioural, and experiential perspectives of BRCA-related breast cancer will be highlighted. This research-based evidence will provide oncology nurses with the skills to establish a holistic plan of care for women with an actual or potential genetic risk for breast cancer.
  Heredity represents the strongest risk factor for ovarian cancer with disease predisposing mutations identified in 15% of the tumors. With the aim to identify genetic classifiers for hereditary ovarian cancer, we profiled hereditary ovarian cancers linked to the hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) syndrome and the hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) syndrome. Genome-wide array comparative genomic hybridization was applied to 12 HBOC associated tumors with BRCA1 mutations and 8 HNPCC associated tumors with mismatch repair gene mutations with 24 sporadic ovarian cancers as a control group. Unsupervised cluster analysis identified two distinct subgroups related to genetic complexity. Sporadic and HBOC associated tumors had complex genetic profiles with an average 41% of the genome altered, whereas the mismatch repair defective tumors had stable genetic profiles, with an average 18% of the genome altered. Losses of 4q34, 13q12-q32 and 19p13 were overrepresented in the HBOC subset. Discriminating genes within these regions include BRCA2, FOXO1A and RB1. Gains on chromosomes 17 and 19 characterized the HNPCC tumors, but target genes herein are unknown. The results indicate that HBOC and HNPCC associated ovarian cancer develop along distinct genetic pathways and genetic profiles can thus be applied to distinguish between different types of hereditary ovarian cancer.
  CONTEXT: Mastectomy and salpingo-oophorectomy are widely used by carriers of BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations to reduce their risks of breast and ovarian cancer. OBJECTIVE: To estimate risk and mortality reduction stratified by mutation and prior cancer status. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Prospective, multicenter cohort study of 2482 women with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations ascertained between 1974 and 2008. The study was conducted at 22 clinical and research genetics centers in Europe and North America to assess the relationship of risk-reducing mastectomy or salpingo-oophorectomy with cancer outcomes. The women were followed up until the end of 2009. MAIN OUTCOMES MEASURES: Breast and ovarian cancer risk, cancer-specific mortality, and overall mortality. RESULTS: No breast cancers were diagnosed in the 247 women with risk-reducing mastectomy compared with 98 women of 1372 diagnosed with breast cancer who did not have risk-reducing mastectomy. Compared with women who did not undergo risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy, women who underwent salpingo-oophorectomy had a lower risk of ovarian cancer, including those with prior breast cancer (6% vs 1%, respectively; hazard ratio [HR], 0.14; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.04-0.59) and those without prior breast cancer (6% vs 2%; HR, 0.28 [95% CI, 0.12-0.69]), and a lower risk of first diagnosis of breast cancer in BRCA1 mutation carriers (20% vs 14%; HR, 0.63 [95% CI, 0.41-0.96]) and BRCA2 mutation carriers (23% vs 7%; HR, 0.36 [95% CI, 0.16-0.82]). Compared with women who did not undergo risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy, undergoing salpingo-oophorectomy was associated with lower all-cause mortality (10% vs 3%; HR, 0.40 [95% CI, 0.26-0.61]), breast cancer-specific mortality (6% vs 2%; HR, 0.44 [95% CI, 0.26-0.76]), and ovarian cancer-specific mortality (3% vs 0.4%; HR, 0.21 [95% CI, 0.06-0.80]). CONCLUSIONS: Among a cohort of women with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations, the use of risk-reducing mastectomy was associated with a lower risk of breast cancer; risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy was associated with a lower risk of ovarian cancer, first diagnosis of breast cancer, all-cause mortality, breast cancer-specific mortality, and ovarian cancer-specific mortality.
  Published data on the association between mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase 1 (MAP3K1) gene rs889312 polymorphism and breast cancer risk are inconclusive. To derive a more precise estimation of the relationship, a meta-analysis was performed. Crude ORs with 95% CIs were used to assess the strength of association between them. A total of seven eligible articles including 26,015 cases and 33,962 controls based on the search criteria were involved in this meta-analysis. We observed that the MAP3K1 rs889312 polymorphism was significantly correlated with breast cancer risk from the fixed effects model when all studies were pooled into the meta-analysis (the allele contrast model: OR 1.09, 95% CI 1.07-1.12; the homozygote codominant: OR 1.22, 95% CI 1.15-1.29; the heterozygote codominant: OR 1.07, 95% CI 1.04-1.11; the dominant model: OR 1.10, 95% CI 1.06-1.13; the recessive model: OR 1.18, 95% CI 1.12-1.25). No significant association was found in the BRCA1 mutation carriers in all genetic models. When stratified by BRCA2 mutation carriers status, statistically significantly elevated risk was found in this meta-analysis (C vs. A: OR 1.12, 95% CI 1.01-1.23; CC vs. AA: OR 1.35, 95% CI 1.06-1.71; the recessive model: OR 1.31, 95% CI 1.05-1.65). There was no evidence for significant association between MAP3K1 rs889312 polymorphism and breast cancer risk in BRCA1 and BRCA2 positive cohort for all comparison models. In conclusion, this meta-analysis suggests that the MAP3K1 rs889312 C allele is a low-penetrant risk factor for developing breast cancer, and there is limited evidence to indicate that MAP3K1 rs889312 polymorphism is associated with increased risk of breast cancer in BRCA1 mutation carriers.
  BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers have elevated risks of breast and ovarian cancers. The risks for cancers at other sites remain unclear. Melanoma has been associated with BRCA2 mutations in some studies, however, few surveys have included non-melanoma skin cancer. We followed 2729 women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation for an average of 5.0 years. These women were asked to report new cases of cancer diagnosed in themselves or in their family. The risks of skin cancer were compared for probands with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations. Of 1779 women with a BRCA1 mutation, 29 developed skin cancer in the follow-up period (1.6%). Of the 950 women with a BRCA2 mutation, 28 developed skin cancer (3.0%) (OR = 1.83 for BRCA2 versus BRCA1; 95% CI 1.08-3.10; P = 0.02). The odds ratio for basal cell carcinoma was higher (OR = 3.8; 95% CI 1.5-9.4; P = 0.002). BRCA2 mutation carriers are at increased risk for skin cancer, compared with BRCA1 carriers, in particular for basal cell carcinoma.
  BACKGROUND: BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations are found in a proportion of families with multiple early-onset breast cancers. There are a large number of different deleterious mutations in both genes, none of which would be detectable using standard genetic association studies. Single common variants and haplotypes of common variants may capture groups of deleterious mutations since some low prevalence haplotypes of common variants occur more frequently among chromosomes that carry rare, deleterious mutations than chromosomes that do not. METHODS: DNA sequence data for BRCA1 and BRCA2 was obtained from 571 participants from the Australian Breast Cancer Family Study. Genetic variants were classified as either deleterious mutations or common genetic variants. Variants tagging common polymorphisms were selected and haplotypes resolved using Haploview. Their frequency was compared to those with and without deleterious mutations using a permutation test. RESULTS: A common genetic variant in BRCA1 (3232A > G) was found to be over-represented in deleterious mutation carriers (p = 0.05), whereas a common genetic variant in BRCA2 (1342A > C) occurred less frequently in deleterious mutation carriers (p = 0.04). All four of the common BRCA1 variants used to form haplotypes occurred more frequently in the deleterious mutation carriers when compared to the non-carriers, but there was no evidence of a difference in the distributions between the two groups (p = 0.34). In BRCA2, all four common variants were found to occur less frequently in the deleterious mutation carriers when compared to non-carriers, but the evidence for difference in the distribution between the two groups was weak (p = 0.16). Several less common haplotypes of common BRCA1 variants were found to be over-represented among deleterious mutation carriers but there was no evidence for this at the population level. In BRCA2, only the most common haplotype was found to occur more frequently in deleterious mutation carriers, with again no evidence at the population level. CONCLUSIONS: We observed differences in the frequency of common genetic variants of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 and their haplotypes between early-onset breast cancer cases who did and did not carry deleterious mutations in these genes. Although our data provide only weak evidence for a difference in frequencies at the population level, the number of deleterious mutation carriers was low and the results may yet be substantiated in a larger study using pooled data.
  Mutations in breast cancer susceptibility (BRCA) genes lead to defects in DNA repair processes resulting in elevated genome instability and predisposing to breast and ovarian cancer. The study was designed to detect mutational spectra of BRCA1/2 genes in a Serbian population. Using automated DNA sequencing, we tested individuals for BRCA mutations, based on positive family history of either breast or ovarian cancer or both. Two novel mutations (c.4765_4784del in BRCA1 exon 15 and c.4367_4368dupTT in BRCA2 exon 11) were detected, in three probands from two different families. These mutations have not been reported previously in the BIC or LOVD databases. Protein products of these mutated alleles lack domains necessary for their DNA repair functions, an indicator that these are deleterious mutations. Neither mutation was found in any proband from 50 other families with hereditary predisposition, so the two mutations are likely family-specific rather than population-specific. Although BRCA1-associated tumors are typically negative for estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and ERBB2, the novel BRCA1 mutation identified in this study was detected in a proband with ER- and PR-positive breast cancer. Steroid receptor-positive BRCA-related breast cancer in this proband supports the idea of characteristic pathological features and older age of onset among BRCA1-mutated ER-positive breast cancers.
  Exposure to estrogen has a major effect on breast cancer risk. A polymorphism (-34 T > C; rs743572) in the cytochrome P450c17alpha gene (CYP17A1) encoding an enzyme which controls estrogen levels was reportedly associated with breast cancer risk in average risk populations. The effect of this polymorphism on breast or ovarian cancer risk for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers has not been thoroughly investigated. With this aim, 2,221 BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers (1,313 with breast cancer, 279 with ovarian cancer, and 695 asymptomatic carriers), with either BRCA1 (n = 1693) or BRCA2 (n = 528) germline mutations from seven centers were genotyped for the -34 T > C CYP17 polymorphism. Genotyping was accomplished using Taqman allelic discrimination, matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) or PCR-based restriction-fragment length polymorphism analysis, and limited sequencing. Data were analyzed using Cox proportional hazards models. The hazard ratios (HRs) for breast cancer was 1.02 (95% CI 0.89-1.17, p = 0.74) and 1.10 (95% CI 0.72-1.67, p = 0.66) for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers, respectively. The HRs for ovarian cancer were 1.17 (0.94-1.46, p = 0.17) and 0.91 (0.31-2.67, p = 0.86) for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers, respectively. Results remained unaltered when the Israeli cohort (primarily Ashkenazim) was evaluated separately. In conclusion, there was no overall evidence for an association of the -34 T > C CYP17 polymorphism with either breast or ovarian cancer risk in BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation carriers.
  BACKGROUND: The germline BRCA2 mutation is associated with increased prostate cancer (PrCa) risk. We have assessed survival in young PrCa cases with a germline mutation in BRCA2 and investigated loss of heterozygosity at BRCA2 in their tumours. METHODS: Two cohorts were compared: one was a group with young-onset PrCa, tested for germline BRCA2 mutations (6 of 263 cases had a germline BRAC2 mutation), and the second was a validation set consisting of a clinical set from Manchester of known BRCA2 mutuation carriers (15 cases) with PrCa. Survival data were compared with a control series of patients in a single clinic as determined by Kaplan-Meier estimates. Loss of heterozygosity was tested for in the DNA of tumour tissue of the young-onset group by typing four microsatellite markers that flanked the BRCA2 gene, followed by sequencing. RESULTS: Median survival of all PrCa cases with a germline BRCA2 mutation was shorter at 4.8 years than was survival in controls at 8.5 years (P=0.002). Loss of heterozygosity was found in the majority of tumours of BRCA2 mutation carriers. Multivariate analysis confirmed that the poorer survival of PrCa in BRCA2 mutation carriers is associated with the germline BRCA2 mutation per se. CONCLUSION: BRCA2 germline mutation is an independent prognostic factor for survival in PrCa. Such patients should not be managed with active surveillance as they have more aggressive disease.
  BACKGROUND: Genomic gains and losses are a result of genomic instability in many types of cancers. BRCA1- and BRCA2-mutated breast cancers are associated with increased amounts of chromosomal aberrations, presumably due their functions in genome repair. Some of these genomic aberrations may harbor genes whose absence or overexpression may give rise to cellular growth advantage. So far, it has not been easy to identify the driver genes underlying gains and losses. A powerful approach to identify these driver genes could be a cross-species comparison of array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) data from cognate mouse and human tumors. Orthologous regions of mouse and human tumors that are commonly gained or lost might represent essential genomic regions selected for gain or loss during tumor development. METHODS: To identify genomic regions that are associated with BRCA1- and BRCA2-mutated breast cancers we compared aCGH data from 130 mouse Brca1Δ/Δ;p53Δ/Δ, Brca2Δ/Δ;p53Δ/Δ and p53Δ/Δ mammary tumor groups with 103 human BRCA1-mutated, BRCA2-mutated and non-hereditary breast cancers. RESULTS: Our genome-wide cross-species analysis yielded a complete collection of loci and genes that are commonly gained or lost in mouse and human breast cancer. Principal common CNAs were the well known MYC-associated gain and RB1/INTS6-associated loss that occurred in all mouse and human tumor groups, and the AURKA-associated gain occurred in BRCA2-related tumors from both species. However, there were also important differences between tumor profiles of both species, such as the prominent gain on chromosome 10 in mouse Brca2Δ/Δ;p53Δ/Δ tumors and the PIK3CA associated 3q gain in human BRCA1-mutated tumors, which occurred in tumors from one species but not in tumors from the other species. This disparity in recurrent aberrations in mouse and human tumors might be due to differences in tumor cell type or genomic organization between both species. CONCLUSIONS: The selection of the oncogenome during mouse and human breast tumor development is markedly different, apart from the MYC gain and RB1-associated loss. These differences should be kept in mind when using mouse models for preclinical studies.
  Women who do not have a documented germline mutation or who do not have a strong family history suspicious for a germline mutation are considered to be at average risk of ovarian cancer. Women who have confirmed deleterious BRCA1 and BRCA2 germline mutations are high risk of ovarian cancer. In addition, women who have a strong family history of either ovarian or breast cancer may carry a deleterious mutation and must be presumed to be at higher-than-average risk, even if they have not been tested, because there could be other mutations that are either untested or yet undiscovered that confirm higher-than-average risk of these diseases. We reviewed studies pertaining to prophylactic bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy in women at average risk of ovarian cancer who are undergoing hysterectomy for benign disease. We also reviewed the role of prophylactic bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy in preventing ovarian cancer based on the level of risk of the patient. For women at average risk of ovarian cancer who are undergoing a hysterectomy for benign conditions, the decision to perform prophylactic bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy should be individualized after appropriate informed consent, including a careful analysis of personal risk factors. Several studies suggest an overall negative health effect when prophylactic bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy is performed before the age of menopause. Ovarian conservation before menopause may be especially important in patients with a personal or strong family history of cardiovascular or neurological disease. Conversely, women at high risk of ovarian cancer should undergo risk-reducing bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy.
  The fallopian tube has recently emerged as an important site of origin for not only early serous cancer in women with inherited mutations in BRCA1/BRCA2 but as a source of many pelvic serous carcinomas. With this increased attention has come the inevitable need to sort out what epithelial abnormalities are clinically important and how they should be reported by the practicing pathologist. This review addresses 4 categories of tubal epithelial change: (1) metaplasias; (2) nonmalignant atypias; (3) potential precursors, including secretory cell outgrowths and p53 signatures; and (4) tubal intraepithelial carcinomas. A modified protocol for sectioning the fallopian tube (SEE-FIM) is discussed and each of the above topics is covered in the context of its differential diagnosis and recommendations for reporting are included. Finally, the rationale for close inspection of the tube, both in presumed benign and malignant disease, is discussed, with reference to an ongoing multi-institutional web-based project (Pelvic-ovarian Cancer Interception project).
  Hereditary breast cancer syndrome was firstly associated with BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes the mutations of which confer high risk to develop breast and/or ovarian cancer. Double heterozygosity is a rare condition in which both BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations are present in a family at the same time. In the current study, a family with double heterozygosity has been reported. Furthermore, for the first time a molecular analysis in both proband lineages, maternal and paternal, has been reported to understand the provenience of both germinal mutations.The case regards a woman who developed breast and ovarian cancer with liver metastasis which presented two mutations, each in the two genes, transmitted from her mother and her father, respectively. In this family all available members have been investigated. The concomitant presence of these peculiar mutations was never reported before suggesting a link with Caucasian population from Southern Italy.
  BRCA2 is a tumor suppressor that functions in homologous recombination, a key genomic integrity pathway. BRCA2 interacts with RAD51, the central protein of recombination, which forms filaments on single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) to perform homology search and DNA strand invasion. We report the purification of full-length human BRCA2 and show that it binds to ~6 RAD51 molecules and promotes RAD51 binding to ssDNA coated by replication protein A (RPA), in a manner that is stimulated by DSS1.
  Individuals with BRCA2 mutations are predisposed to breast cancers owing to genome instability. To determine the functions of BRCA2, the human protein was purified. It was found to bind selectively to single-stranded DNA (ssDNA), and to ssDNA in tailed duplexes and replication fork structures. Monomeric and dimeric forms of BRCA2 were observed by EM. BRCA2 directed the binding of RAD51 recombinase to ssDNA, reduced the binding of RAD51 to duplex DNA and stimulated RAD51-mediated DNA strand exchange. These observations provide a molecular basis for the role of BRCA2 in the maintenance of genome stability.
  Mutation of the breast cancer susceptibility gene, BRCA2, leads to breast and ovarian cancers. Mechanistic insight into the functions of human BRCA2 has been limited by the difficulty of isolating this large protein (3,418 amino acids). Here we report the purification of full-length BRCA2 and show that it both binds RAD51 and potentiates recombinational DNA repair by promoting assembly of RAD51 onto single-stranded DNA (ssDNA). BRCA2 acts by targeting RAD51 to ssDNA over double-stranded DNA, enabling RAD51 to displace replication protein-A (RPA) from ssDNA and stabilizing RAD51-ssDNA filaments by blocking ATP hydrolysis. BRCA2 does not anneal ssDNA complexed with RPA, implying it does not directly function in repair processes that involve ssDNA annealing. Our findings show that BRCA2 is a key mediator of homologous recombination, and they provide a molecular basis for understanding how this DNA repair process is disrupted by BRCA2 mutations, which lead to chromosomal instability and cancer.
  Inactivating mutations of the CHEK2 and STK11 genes are responsible for Li-Fraumeni and Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, respectively, both autosomal dominant syndromes associated with an increased risk of breast cancer. The PALB2/FANCN gene encodes a nuclear partner of BRCA2 and acts as a linker between BRCA1 and BRCA2. Monoallelic PALB2 truncating mutations were shown to confer higher risk of breast cancer. To evaluate the proportion of French Canadian non-BRCA1/BRCA2 families with high risk of breast cancer potentially harboring alterations in these three breast cancer susceptibility genes, the whole coding and flanking intronic sequences were analyzed in a series of 96 high-risk breast cancer individuals. Despite no PALB2 deleterious truncating mutations being identified, the c.1100delC breast-cancer-associated CHEK2 mutation and a STK11 mutation reported to be the causative mutation in a Peutz-Jeghers family were identified. This extensive analysis also led to the identification of several variants in these genes. Ascertainment of allele frequency of these variants in a cohort of 96 healthy unrelated women suggests a difference in allele frequency for two STK11 intronic variants. In addition, large genomic rearrangements in both STK11 and PALB2 were also examined. Our analysis led to the conclusion that CHEK2, STK11, and PALB2 mutations or large genomic rearrangements of either STK11 or PALB2 are rare, and do not contribute to a substantial fraction of breast cancer susceptibility in high-risk French Canadian breast cancer families.
  OBJECTIVE: To identify risk factors for the presence of a non-invasive lesion of the fallopian tube in women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation. METHODS: 173 BRCA mutation carriers underwent a prophylactic salpingo-oophorectomy at the University Health Network, Toronto between 2000 and 2008 and were evaluated for the presence of a non-invasive lesion of the fallopian tube. Patients were classified as having p53 overexpression ("p53-signature"), a tubal intra-epithelial carcinoma (TIC) or normal tubal epithelium. We obtained a risk factor questionnaire from all patients. We calculated odds ratios for several risk factors, comparing patients with a tubal abnormality to those with normal histology. RESULTS: Of the 173 patients, 43 (25%) were found to have a tubal lesion, including 23% of the BRCA1 mutation carriers and 27% of the BRCA2 mutation carriers. The prevalence of a non-invasive tubal lesion increased with age; an abnormality was present in 5% of women who had surgery before the age of 40 (1 of 12) and in 56% of women who underwent surgery at age 60 or above (6 of 13; p=0.004). A non-invasive lesion of either type was found in 31.2% of women with a BMI > 25 kg/m2) compared to 18.0% of patients with a BMI < 25 kg/m2 at the time of surgery (p=0.05). The average duration of oral contraceptive use among women with normal tubes was 6.0 years, compared to an average duration of 4.0 years for women with a p53 signature (p=0.09) and was 2.7 years for women with a TIC (p=0.0003). CONCLUSION: The prevalence of tubal p53 signature and TIC increases with age at salpingectomy and with BMI. Oral contraceptive use is associated with a decrease in the prevalence of TICs.
  Women with a family history of breast cancer have mutations in one of the breast cancer susceptibility genes, BRCA1 or BRCA2. Since the discovery of these two genes, around 100,000 women worldwide have undergone genetic testing. The decisions they make based on the results are usually life changing and may involve radical preventive surgeries such as prophylactic mastectomy and oophorectamy. However, not all mutations will lead to breast cancer, and to prevent unnecessary surgery, we are developing assays to determine which mutations adversely affect the functions of the protein encoded by the BRCA1 gene. The functions of BRCA1 are mediated by numerous interactions that are required for cell-cycle and centrosome control, transcriptional regulation and the DNA damage response. Missense mutations that perturb the interactions of BRCA1 will adversely affect these functions and are, therefore, likely to lead to breast cancer. Determining the effect missense mutations have on the interaction of BRCA1 with DNA will form the basis of the assay described in this chapter.
  We describe here a comprehensive and reliable assay to test the functional significance of variants of unknown clinical significance (VUS) identified in the human breast cancer susceptibility gene, BRCA2. The assay is based on the ability of human BRCA2 to complement the loss of endogenous Brca2 in mouse embryonic stem cells. The procedure involves generation of a desired mutation in BRCA2 present in a bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) and the introduction of the BAC into ES cells engineered for the assay. These ES cells have one null and one conditional allele of Brca2. First, the effect of the BRCA2 variants on the viability of ES cells is tested by Cre-mediated deletion of the conditional allele. Subsequently, variants that result in viable ES cells are examined for their effect on known functions of BRCA2 using a variety of functional assays such as sensitivity to genotoxic agents, in vivo and in vitro proliferation, effect on homologous recombination and genomic stability. The method described herein allows for the analysis of three to five sequence variants within 2-3 months. This approach can also be used for functional analysis of variants identified in other human disease genes that result in a phenotype detectable in ES cells.
  Selection for genetic testing for pathogenic mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 is an important area of healthcare. While testing costs for mutational analysis are falling, costs of tests in North America remain in excess of $3,000. Most countries state that there should be at least a 10-20% likelihood of detecting a mutation in BRCA1 or BRCA2 within a family before mutational analysis is performed. A number of computer-based models have been developed to assess this likelihood, and these continue to be improved to incorporate mutation frequencies, breast cancer incidence and tumour histology. However, these can be time-consuming and difficult to use in a busy clinic. The Manchester scoring system was developed in 2003, and we have continued to validate its use in Western populations. The scoring system discriminates well at both the 10 and 20% threshold for testing and compares very well with more complex computer-based models. However, it should not be used in its current form in founder populations or populations with low incidence of breast cancer, although a lower points threshold could be used to determine an appropriate cut off. The development of the Manchester score and its comparison with other models will be described in this chapter.
  We present the routine diagnostic application of EMMA (Enhanced Mismatch Mutation Analysis, Fluigent), a new, fast, reliable, and cost-effective method for mutation screening. This method is based on heteroduplex analysis by capillary electrophoresis and relies on the use of innovative matrices increasing the electrophoretic mobility differences between homoduplex and heteroduplex DNA, which is further enhanced by the addition of nucleosides in the separation matrix. Nucleosides interact with heteroduplex mismatched bases, hence increasing mobility difference with homoduplex. As separations are performed by multi-capillary electrophoresis, it allows for high automation, low cost, and high throughput. Moreover, EMMA, in combination with limiting PCR conditions, can be used to achieve the simultaneous detection of point mutation and large scale rearrangement in a single run.We now report on the routine diagnostic use of this method for BRCA1 and BRCA2 screening. The coding sequence and exon-intron junctions of BRCA1 and BRCA2 were amplified in 24 multiplex PCRs using a single condition. PCRs were electrophoresed with a single analytical condition on an ABI3100, and data were analyzed using dedicated software (Emmalys).The strength of this new method relies on the following assets: (1) a single condition of analysis: modeling related to melting domain is not required (2) simultaneous detection of point mutations and large scale rearrangements, (3) optimized and ready-to-use polymer that can be used on various ABI sequencers, (4) easy to use, (5) low reagent costs, and (6) throughput.
  Epidemiological evidence from different studies has shown that genes harboring sequence variations may modify breast cancer risk in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers. Current attempts to identify genetic modifiers of BRCA1 and BRCA2 associated risk have focused on a candidate gene-based approach or the development of large genome-wide association studies. However, both methods have notable limitations. This chapter describes a novel approach for analyzing gene expression differences to prioritize candidate modifier genes for single nucleotide polymorphism association studies. The advantage that gives this strategy an edge over other candidate gene-based studies is its potential to identify candidate genes that interact with exogenous risk factors to cause or modify cancer, without detailed a priori knowledge of the molecular pathways involved.
  To better understand the alterations present in the group of the so-called BRCAX tumors, we have used a cDNA microarray containing genes related to tumorigenesis and analyzed a series of 49 tumors consisting of 13 BRCA1, 14 BRCAX and 22 sporadic. We have confirmed that the BRCAX tumors are heterogeneous and can be divided in at least two main subgroups, so-called A and B, transcriptionally distinguishable and with different altered pathways within each of the groups. We have found that BRCAX-A and B subgroups, can be classified as Luminal A and Luminal B, respectively, taking into account the intrinsic phenotypes defined for the sporadic breast tumors. We have found that, at the somatic level, the BRCAX-B tumors are identical to their sporadic Luminal B counterparts, whereas BRCAX-A, despite having a Luminal A phenotype, shows additional genomic alterations. We have found 21 deregulated genes in the BRCAX-A group that we have called "the BRCAX susceptibility pathway" and suggested it as a candidate to search for new genes involved in the inherited susceptibility underlying the disease in this group.
  The aim of the present study is to analyze the relationship of the incidence of mutations in the two major genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 conferring risk of breast cancer (BC) and ovarian cancer (OC) with the cancer burden in families and with the presence and age of onset of BC/OC. We included 704 index patients (IP) and 668 family members of the IP who tested positive for BRCA1/BRCA2 who were studied in the Program of Genetic Counselling in Cancer of the Valencia Community (Spain). We found 129 IPs with deleterious mutations (18.3%), 59 in BRCA1 and 70 in BRCA2, detecting 396 mutations in this kindred. The incidence of mutations and their distribution between BRCA1 and BRCA2 showed a significantly uneven incidence among the family groups (P < 0.001). We found 179 tumors in the 396 mutation carriers (45%) and detected only 11 cancers among the 272 non-mutation carriers (P < 0.001). No differences in the tumor prevalence or the age of onset of cancer between the genes among the mutation carriers were found. The mutation carriers showed a 50% probability of having BC/OC at a median age of 49 years (95% CI 46-52 years) and 78% at the age of 70 years (95% CI: 71-85%). In conclusion the family burden of BC and OC is strongly associated with the incidence of BRCAs mutations and could foretell which of the two BRCAs genes is more likely to have mutations. Mutation carriers have a 50% risk of having BC/OC by the age of 50 years.
  DNA-methylating agents of the S(N)2 type target DNA mostly at ring nitrogens, producing predominantly N-methylated purines. These adducts are repaired by base excision repair (BER). Since defects in BER cause accumulation of DNA single-strand breaks (SSBs) and sensitize cells to the agents, it has been suggested that some of the lesions on their own or BER intermediates (e.g. apurinic sites) are cytotoxic, blocking DNA replication and inducing replication-mediated DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). Here, we addressed the question of whether homologous recombination (HR) or non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) or both are involved in the repair of DSBs formed following treatment of cells with methyl methanesulfonate (MMS). We show that HR defective cells (BRCA2, Rad51D and XRCC3 mutants) are dramatically more sensitive to MMS-induced DNA damage as measured by colony formation, apoptosis and chromosomal aberrations, while NHEJ defective cells (Ku80 and DNA-PK(CS) mutants) are only mildly sensitive to the killing, apoptosis-inducing and clastogenic effects of MMS. On the other hand, the HR mutants were almost completely refractory to the formation of sister chromatid exchanges (SCEs) following MMS treatment. Since DSBs are expected to be formed specifically in the S-phase, we assessed the formation and kinetics of repair of DSBs by γH2AX quantification in a cell cycle specific manner. In the cytotoxic dose range of MMS a significant amount of γH2AX foci was induced in S, but not G1- and G2-phase cells. A major fraction of γH2AX foci colocalized with 53BP1 and phosphorylated ATM, indicating they are representative of DSBs. DSB formation following MMS treatment was also demonstrated by the neutral comet assay. Repair kinetics revealed that HR mutants exhibit a significant delay in DSB repair, while NHEJ mutants completed S-phase specific DSB repair with a kinetic similar to the wildtype. Moreover, DNA-PKcs inhibition in HR mutants did not affect the repair kinetics after MMS treatment. Overall, the data indicate that agents producing N-alkylpurines in the DNA induce replication-dependent DSBs. Further, they show that HR is the major pathway of protection of cells against DSB formation, killing and genotoxicity following S(N)2-alkylating agents.
  Drugs that inhibit the enzyme poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase (PARP) are showing considerable promise for the treatment of cancers that have mutations in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 tumor suppressors. This therapeutic approach exploits a synthetic lethal strategy to target the specific DNA repair pathway in these tumors. High-grade ovarian cancers have a generally poor prognosis, and accumulating evidence suggests that mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2, or silencing of BRCA1 by promoter methylation, may be common in this disease. Here, we consider how the potential benefit of PARP inhibitors might be maximized in ovarian cancer. We suggest that it will be crucial to explore novel therapeutic trial strategies and drug combinations, and incorporate robust biomarkers predictive of response if these drugs are to reach their full potential.
  Ductal carcinoma in situ (dcis) in a young man is rarely reported. Our patient, a 25-year-old man, presented with apparent symptomatic unilateral gynecomastia. He has a strong history of cancer on both the maternal and paternal sides of his family, including breast and lung (maternal) and melanoma, colon, and pancreatic (paternal). His mother tested negative for BRCA1 and BRCA2. There is no information on paternal genetic testing.The patient was treated with left subcutaneous mastectomy. Upon histologic review of the sample, concurrent gynecomastia and dcis were discovered. To date, only 4 cases of gynecomastia and dcis have been described in younger male patients. Because only 30%-50% of patients with dcis eventually develop invasive cancer in the subsequent 10-20 years, dcis prevalence in the general population may be higher than predicted. This case underscores the importance of family history in any patient presenting with a breast mass. Patients must be made aware of the risk, however small it may be, and physicians must remain cautious of cancer in young men with gynecomastia.
  Few studies have reported on the comprehensive BRCA1/2 mutation analyses of hereditary breast cancer (HBC) families of French Canadian descent. Here we report the investigation of 82 families with at least 3 cases of breast cancer evaluated for mutations by DNA sequencing and/or multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) assay. DNA sequencing identified pathogenic mutations in 37 (45.1%) families, of which 70.2% were one of three recurring mutations (BRCA1:R1443X, BRCA2:8765delAG, and BRCA2:E1953X) frequently reported in this founder population; and variants of uncertain clinical significance in 7 (8.5%) families of which two harbored BRCA2:E3002K. MLPA analysis of the 38 DNA sequence-negative families did not reveal any large rearrangements in BRCA1/2. A phenotypic characterization of the cancer families based on pathogenic mutation status revealed that there were significantly fewer very young age at diagnosis breast cancer cases (<36 years) in mutation-negative families (5.9%, 9 of 153) than in BRCA1 (22.8%, 13 of 57; P = 0.0003) or BRCA2 (22.9%, 27 of 118; P < 1x 10E5) mutation-positive families. There were significantly more mutation-positive families (29 of 36, 80.6%) with a very young age of onset of breast cancer case than those that did not (8 of 39, 20.5%) (P < 10E6). The comprehensive mutation analysis of BRCA1/2 suggests that genomic rearrangements are unlikely to account for sequence-negative HBC families and affirms that the presence of a very young age of diagnosis of breast cancer is strongly predictive of mutation carrier status of French Canadian HBC families.
  DNA double-strand breaks resulting from normal cellular processes including replication and exogenous sources such as ionizing radiation pose a serious risk to genome stability, and cells have evolved different mechanisms for their efficient repair. The two major pathways involved in the repair of double-strand breaks in eukaryotic cells are non-homologous end joining and homologous recombination. Numerous factors affect the decision to repair a double-strand break via these pathways, and accumulating evidence suggests these major repair pathways both cooperate and compete with each other at double-strand break sites to facilitate efficient repair and promote genomic integrity.
  Our understanding of hereditary forms of breast cancer has made enormous advances over the past 15 years, based on epidemiological and molecular genetic studies, and the development of a vast number of informative genetic markers. These studies have involved women with both familial and sporadic forms of breast cancer. Genetic susceptibility to breast cancer can involve several modes of inheritance: Mendelian inheritance, mostly involving autosomal dominant mutations with high penetrance and a high risk of malignancy (the BRCA1, BRCA2, TP53, PTEN and STK11 genes); dominant mutations associated with a lower risk (ATM, BRIP1, PALB2, etc), and multigenic patterns involving common susceptibility variants, i.e., polymorphisms located within predisposing gene loci (FGFR2, TNRC9, MAP3K1, LSP1, etc.) or intergenic regions. Other predisposing factors remain to be discovered, as genetic factors associated with a high breast cancer risk (BRCA1, BRCA2, TP53, PTEN STK11, etc) are only found in about 20% of genetically screened breast cancer families. So far, only the first class of genes have found clinical applications, guiding the choice of medical or surgical treatment. More refined individual risk profiles will benefit from genome-wide polymorphic DNA variant studies anda better understanding of the impact of non genetic factors, such as the obstetrical and gynaecological history, and mutagen exposure.
  To investigate the association of expression and promoter methylation of tumor-suppressor genes with risk of ovarian cancer, we conducted a case-control study of 102 patients with serous epithelial ovarian cancer and 100 patients without ovarian cancers. We measured mRNA expression levels (by real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction) and methylation status (by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction) of five candidate genes (BRCA1, BRCA2, hMLH1, MGMT, and DNMT3B) in tumors from the cases and normal ovaries from the controls. We found that mRNA expression levels of the five genes were decreased in tumors than in normal ovaries with 0.39-fold for BRCA1, 0.25-fold for BRCA2, 0.42-fold for hMLH1, 0.45-fold for MGMT, and 0.87-fold for DNMT3B, calculated by the 2(-DeltaDeltaCT) method. Ovarian cancer risk (odds ratios, ORs) was associated with low expression of all genes (2.95 [95% confidence interval (CI), 1.51 - 5.78] for BRCA1, 3.65 (95% CI, 1.82 - 7.30) for BRCA2, 5.25 (95% CI, 2.52 - 10.96) for hMLH1, and 4.72 (95% CI, 2.32 - 9.62) for MGMT) but not DNMT3B. However, methylation status was not associated with gene expression levels in the tumors, except for hMLH1 whose mean (+/- SD) gene expression was significantly lower in methylated (13.0 +/- 7.6) than in unmethylated (31.2 +/- 44.8) tumors (P < 0.001). We concluded that low mRNA expression of these tumor-suppressor genes, likely due to molecular mechanisms in addition to the promoter methylation in some instances, may be a biomarker for ovarian cancer risk in this study population. Larger studies are needed to validate our findings.
  We have previously shown that a 28-amino acid peptide derived from the BRC4 motif of BRCA2 tumor suppressor inhibits selectively human RAD51 recombinase (HsRad51). With the aim of designing better inhibitors for cancer treatment, we combined an in silico docking approach with in vitro biochemical testing to construct a highly efficient chimera peptide from eight existing human BRC motifs. We built a molecular model of all BRC motifs complexed with HsRad51 based on the crystal structure of the BRC4 motif-HsRad51 complex, computed the interaction energy of each residue in each BRC motif, and selected the best amino acid residue at each binding position. This analysis enabled us to propose four amino acid substitutions in the BRC4 motif. Three of these increased the inhibitory effect in vitro, and this effect was found to be additive. We thus obtained a peptide that is about 10 times more efficient in inhibiting HsRad51-ssDNA complex formation than the original peptide.
  BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in women in Algeria. The contribution of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations to hereditary breast/ovarian cancer in Algerian population is largely unknown. Here, we describe analysis of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in 86 individuals from 70 families from an Algerian cohort with a personal and family history suggestive of genetic predisposition to breast cancer. METHODS: The approach used is based on BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations screening by High-Resolution Melting (HRM) curve analysis followed by direct sequencing. All samples for which no pathogenic mutation was found were analyzed by MLPA for large deletions or duplications. RESULTS: Three distinct pathogenic mutations c.83_84delTG, c.181T>G, c.798_799delTT and two large rearrangements involving deletion of exon 2 and exon 8 respectively, were detected in BRCA1 gene. Moreover 17 unclassified variants and polymorphisms were detected in BRCA1 gene (6 described for the first time). Two pathogenic mutations, c.1310_1313delAAGA and c.5722_5723delCT and 40 unclassified variants and polymorphisms (14 never described before) were identified in BRCA2 gene. CONCLUSIONS: For the first time, we used HRM and MLPA to identify BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in Algerian patients with a personal and family history suggestive of genetic predisposition to breast cancer. The implications of these new findings in regard to genetic testing and counseling are substantial for the Algerian population.
  Studies of the role of germline or inherited genetic variation on cancer outcome can fall into three distinct categories. First, the impact of highly penetrant but lowly prevalent mutations of germline DNA on cancer prognosis has been studied extensively for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations as well as mutations related to hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer syndrome. These mainly modest-sized analyses have produced conflicting results. Although some associations have been observed, they may not be independent of other known clinical or molecular prognostic factors. Second, the impact of germline polymorphisms on cancer prognosis is a burgeoning field of research. However, a deeper understanding of potentially confounding somatic changes and larger multi-institutional, multistage studies may be needed before consistent results are seen. Third, research examining the impact of germline genetic variation on differential treatment response or toxicity (pharmacogenetics) has produced some proof-of-principle results. Putative germline pharmacogenetic predictors of outcome include DPYD polymorphisms and fluorouracil toxicity, UGT1A1 variation and irinotecan toxicity, and CYP2D6 polymorphisms and tamoxifen efficacy, with emerging data on predictors of molecularly targeted or biologic drugs. Here we review data pertaining to these germline outcome and germline toxicity relationships.
  Recently, a variant allele in the 3'UTR of the KRAS gene (rs61764370 T>G) was shown to be associated with an increased risk for developing non-small cell lung cancer, as well as ovarian cancer, and was most enriched in ovarian cancer patients from hereditary breast and ovarian cancer families. This functional variant has been shown to disrupt a let-7 miRNA binding site leading to increased expression of KRAS in vitro. In the current study, we have genotyped this KRAS-variant in breast cancer index cases from 268 BRCA1 families, 89 BRCA2 families, 685 non-BRCA1/BRCA2 families, and 797 geographically matched controls. The allele frequency of the KRAS-variant was found to be increased among patients with breast cancer from BRCA1, but not BRCA2 or non-BRCA1/BRCA2 families as compared to controls. As BRCA1 carriers mostly develop ER-negative breast cancers, we also examined the variant allele frequency among indexes from non-BRCA1/BRCA2 families with ER-negative breast cancer. The prevalence of the KRAS-variant was, however, not significantly increased as compared to controls, suggesting that the variant allele not just simply associates with ER-negative breast cancer. Subsequent expansion of the number of BRCA1 carriers with breast cancer by including other family members in addition to the index cases resulted in loss of significance for the association between the variant allele and mutant BRCA1 breast cancer. In this same cohort, the KRAS-variant did not appear to modify breast cancer risk for BRCA1 carriers. Importantly, results from the current study suggest that KRAS-variant frequencies might be increased among BRCA1 carriers, but solid proof requires confirmation in a larger cohort of BRCA1 carriers.
  All forms of life on earth must cope with constant exposure to DNA-damaging agents that may promote cancer development. As a biological barrier, known as DNA damage response (DDR), cells are provided with both DNA repair mechanisms and highly conserved cell cycle checkpoints. The latter are responsible for the control of cell cycle phase progression with ATM, ATR, Chk1, and Chk2 as the main signaling molecules, thus dealing with both endogenous and exogenous sources of DNA damage. As cell cycle checkpoint and also DNA repair genes, such as BRCA1 and BRCA2, are frequently mutated, we here discuss their fundamental roles in the pathogenesis of human cancers. Importantly, as current evidence also suggests a role of MAPK's (mitogen activated protein kinases) in cell cycle checkpoint control, we describe in this review both the ATR/ATM-Chk1/Chk2 signaling pathways as well as the regulation of cell cycle checkpoints by MAPK's as molecular mechanisms in DDR, and how their dysfunction is related to cancer development. Moreover, since damage to DNA might be the common underlying mechanism for the positive outcome of chemotherapy, we also discuss targeting anticancer treatments on cell cycle checkpoints as an important issue emerging in drug discovery.
  BACKGROUND:: BRCA1 or BRCA2 (BRCA1/2)-mutated ovarian carcinomas may originate in the fallopian tube. The authors of this report investigated alterations in BRCA1/2 tubal epithelium to define the molecular pathogenesis of these carcinomas. METHODS:: Tubal epithelium was evaluated from 31 BRCA1/2 mutation carriers with gynecologic carcinomas (BRCA CA), 89 mutation carriers who underwent risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy (RRSO), and 87 controls. Ki-67 expression and p53 foci (>/=10 of 12 consecutive staining cells) were scored by 2 investigators who were blinded to patient designations. Expression levels of p27 and p21 were evaluated within p53 foci. Loss of heterozygosity at the BRCA1/2 mutation site was evaluated in microdissected p53 foci and tubal neoplasms. RESULTS:: Background tubal proliferation as measured by Ki-67 staining was increased in the BRCA1 RRSO group (P = .005) compared with the control group. Women who had BRCA1/2 mutations had more p53 foci identified per tubal segment than women in the control group (P = .02). Levels of p27 were decreased in 12 of 28 p53 foci from women with BRCA1 mutations and in 0 of 16 p53 foci from controls (P = .002). There was no loss of the wild type BRCA1/2 allele in 5 tested p53 foci. Tubal neoplasia lost the wild type allele in 6 of 6 foci (P = .002). CONCLUSIONS:: The current results suggested a model of tubal carcinogenesis in women with BRCA1/2 mutations. Increased proliferation occurred globally in at-risk tubal epithelium. A mutation in the tumor protein p53 gene TP53 with clonal proliferation and loss of p27 occurred before neoplastic proliferation. Loss of the wild type BRCA1/2 allele occurred with neoplastic proliferation and before invasion. Cancer 2010. (c) 2010 American Cancer Society.
  PURPOSE: The retinoblastoma gene (RB1) is a tumor suppressor gene that was first discovered in a rare ocular pediatric tumor called retinoblastoma (RB). The RB1 gene is essential for normal progression through the cell cycle and exerts part of its function through the family of transcription factors (E2F) and many other intermediaries. In the absence of normal RB1, genomic instability and chromosomal aberrations accumulate, leading to tumor initiation, progression, and ultimately metastasis. The purpose of this report was to identify the molecular pathways that are deregulated in retinoblastoma. METHODS: We compared gene expression signatures of matched normal retinal tissue and retinoblastoma (RB) tumor tissue from six individuals, using microarray analysis followed by statistical and bioinformatic analyses. RESULTS: We identified 1,116 genes with increased expression and 837 with decreased expression in RB tumor tissue compared to matched normal retinal tissue. Functional categories of the cognate genes with the greatest statistical support were cell cycle (309 genes), cell death (437 genes), DNA replication, recombination and repair (270 genes), cellular growth and proliferation (464 genes), and cellular assembly and organization (110 genes). The list included differentially expressed retinal cone-cell-specific markers. These data indicated the predominance of cone cells in RB and support the idea that the latter group of cells may be the cells of origin for RB. CONCLUSIONS: The genes differentially expressed in RB as compared to normal retina belong mainly to DNA damage-response pathways, including, but not limited to, breast cancer associated genes (BRCA1, BRCA2), ataxia telangiectasia mutated gene (ATM), ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3 related gene(ATR), E2F, checkpoint kinase 1 (CHK1) genes. In addition, novel pathways, such as aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) signaling, polo-like kinase and mitosis, purine metabolism pathways were involved. The molecules AHR, CHK1, and polo-like kinases are of particular interest because there are several currently available drugs that target these molecules. Further studies are needed to determine if targeting these pathways in RB will have therapeutic value. It is also important to evaluate the relative importance of these pathways in different cells that make up the normal retina.
  BACKGROUND: Down syndrome (DS) individuals suffer mental retardation with further cognitive decline and early onset Alzheimer's disease. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To understand how trisomy 21 causes these neurological abnormalities we investigated changes in gene expression networks combined with a systematic cell lineage analysis of adult neurogenesis using the Ts1Cje mouse model of DS. We demonstrated down regulation of a number of key genes involved in proliferation and cell cycle progression including Mcm7, Brca2, Prim1, Cenpo and Aurka in trisomic neurospheres. We found that trisomy did not affect the number of adult neural stem cells but resulted in reduced numbers of neural progenitors and neuroblasts. Analysis of differentiating adult Ts1Cje neural progenitors showed a severe reduction in numbers of neurons produced with a tendency for less elaborate neurites, whilst the numbers of astrocytes was increased. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We have shown that trisomy affects a number of elements of adult neurogenesis likely to result in a progressive pathogenesis and consequently providing the potential for the development of therapies to slow progression of, or even ameliorate the neuronal deficits suffered by DS individuals.
  Metcalfe KA, Poll A, Llacuachaqui M, Nanda S, Tulman A, Mian N, Sun P, Narod SA. Patient satisfaction and cancer-related distress among unselected Jewish women undergoing genetic testing for BRCA1 and BRCA2. It is not known to what extent participation in a genetic testing program for BRCA1 and BRCA2, which does not include an extensive pre-test counselling session, influences cancer-related distress, cancer risk perception and patient satisfaction. Unselected Jewish women in Ontario were offered genetic testing for three common Jewish BRCA mutations. Before testing and 1-year post-testing, the women completed questionnaires which assessed cancer-related distress, cancer risk perception, and satisfaction. A total of 2080 women enrolled in the study; of these, 1516 (73%) completed a 1-year follow-up questionnaire. In women with a BRCA mutation, the mean breast cancer risk perception increased from 41.1% to 59.6% after receiving a positive genetic test result (p = 0.002). Among non-carriers, breast cancer risk perception decreased slightly, from 35.8% to 33.5% (p = 0.08). The mean level of cancer-related distress increased significantly for women with a BRCA mutation, but did not change in women without a mutation; 92.8% expressed satisfaction with the testing process. The results of this study suggest that the majority of Jewish women who took part in population genetic screening for BRCA1 and BRCA2 were satisfied with the delivery of genetic testing and would recommend testing to other Jewish women. However, women with a BRCA mutation experienced increased levels of cancer-related distress.
  The c.156_157insAlu BRCA2 mutation has so far only been reported in hereditary breast/ovarian cancer (HBOC) families of Portuguese origin. Since this mutation is not detectable using the commonly used screening methodologies and must be specifically sought, we screened for this rearrangement in a total of 5,443 suspected HBOC families from several countries. Whereas the c.156_157insAlu BRCA2 mutation was detected in 11 of 149 suspected HBOC families from Portugal, representing 37.9% of all deleterious mutations, in other countries it was detected only in one proband living in France and in four individuals requesting predictive testing living in France and in the USA, all being Portuguese immigrants. After performing an extensive haplotype study in carrier families, we estimate that this founder mutation occurred 558 +/- 215 years ago. We further demonstrate significant quantitative differences regarding the production of the BRCA2 full length RNA and the transcript lacking exon 3 in c.156_157insAlu BRCA2 mutation carriers and in controls. The cumulative incidence of breast cancer in carriers did not differ from that of other BRCA2 and BRCA1 pathogenic mutations. We recommend that all suspected HBOC families from Portugal or with Portuguese ancestry are specifically tested for this rearrangement.
  The rs3834129 polymorphism, in the promoter of CASP8 gene, has been recently reported as associated with breast cancer risk in the general population, with the minor allele del having a protective effect. Some of the genetic variants found associated with breast cancer risk were reported as risk modifiers in individuals with mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. Here, we tested the effect of the rs3834129 del allele on breast cancer risk in BRCA mutation carriers. The rs3834129 was genotyped in a total of 1,207 Italian female BRCA mutation carriers. Of these, 740 carried a BRCA1 mutation and 467 a BRCA2 mutation. Overall, 699 were affected with breast cancer and 508 were unaffected. When considering class 1 (loss-of-function) BRCA mutations, hazard ratios estimated by weighted multivariable Cox regression model, for individuals with at least one copy of the del allele, were 1.46 (95% confidence interval (CI): 1.08-1.99) for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers combined, 1.74 (95% CI: 1.24-2.46) for BRCA1 mutation carriers, and 1.09 (95% CI: 0.66-1.80) for BRCA2 mutation carriers. These results suggest that the minor allele del of rs3834129 is associated under a dominant model with increased breast cancer risk in carriers of BRCA1 mutations but not in carriers of BRCA2 mutations.
  Ovarian cancer (OC) is the single most deadly form of women's cancer, typically presenting as an advanced disease at diagnosis in part due to a lack of known risk factors or genetic markers of risk. The KRAS oncogene and altered levels of the microRNA (miRNA) let-7 are associated with an increased risk of developing solid tumors. In this study, we investigated a hypothesized association between an increased risk of OC and a variant allele of KRAS at rs61764370, referred to as the KRAS-variant, which disrupts a let-7 miRNA binding site in this oncogene. Specimens obtained were tested for the presence of the KRAS-variant from nonselected OC patients in three independent cohorts, two independent ovarian case-control studies, and OC patients with hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome (HBOC) as well as their family members. Our results indicate that the KRAS-variant is associated with more than 25% of nonselected OC cases. Further, we found that it is a marker for a significant increased risk of developing OC, as confirmed by two independent case-control analyses. Lastly, we determined that the KRAS-variant was present in 61% of HBOC patients without BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations, previously considered uninformative, as well as in their family members with cancer. Our findings strongly support the hypothesis that the KRAS-variant is a genetic marker for increased risk of developing OC, and they suggest that the KRAS-variant may be a new genetic marker of cancer risk for HBOC families without other known genetic abnormalities.
  Comparative effectiveness research has become an integral part of health care planning in most developed countries. In a simulated cohort of women, aged 30-65, who tested positive for BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations, we compared outcomes of mammography with and without MRI, prophylactic oophorectomy with and without mastectomy, mastectomy alone, and chemoprevention. Methods: Using Treeage 9.02 software, we developed Markov models with 25,000 Monte Carlo simulations and conducted probabilistic sensitivity analysis. We based mutation penetrance rates, breast and ovarian cancer incidence, and mortality rates, and costs in terms of 2009 dollars, on published studies and data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Program and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. We used preference ratings obtained from mutation carriers and controls to adjust survival for quality of life (QALYs). Results: For BRCA1 mutation carriers, prophylactic oophorectomy at $1,741 per QALY, was more cost effective than both surgeries and dominated all other interventions. For BRCA2 carriers, prophylactic oophorectomy, at $4,587 per QALY, was more cost effective than both surgeries. Without quality adjustment, both mastectomy and BSO surgeries dominated all other interventions. In all simulations, preventive surgeries or chemoprevention dominated or were more cost effective than screening because screening modalities were costly. Conclusion: Our analysis suggested that among BRCA1/2 mutation carriers, prophylactic surgery would dominate or be cost effective compared to chemoprevention and screening. Annual screening with MRI and mammography was the most effective strategy because it was associated with the longest quality-adjusted survival, but it was also very expensive.
  Introduction: Bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (BSO) is a common procedure for preventing breast and ovarian cancer in high-risk women. The goal of this study was to determine the incidence of subsequent breast cancer (BC) in a high-risk population and to identify clinical and epidemiological predictors of BC following BSO. Materials and methods: One hundred and thirty-three consecutive high-risk women, tested for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations due to family history, underwent preventive or therapeutic BSO at one of the study hospitals. One hundred and three patients had breast tissue at risk and were considered evaluable for the event-free survival analysis. Twenty-five women harbored a deleterious mutation in BRCA1 and 25 in BRCA2 genes. Results: Fifteen cases of invasive BC were diagnosed with a median interval of 49 months after BSO. Multivariate analysis showed that a prior BC after 50 years of age (p=0.004), age over 50 years at the time of BSO (p=0.005), and prior replacement or contraceptive hormonal treatment (p=0.007) were significantly associated with a shorter event-free survival. Conclusion: In conclusion, age at prior diagnosis of cancer, age at BSO and prior hormonal treatment may be predictors of breast cancer after BSO.
  INTRODUCTION: A significant proportion of high-risk breast cancer families are not explained by mutations in known genes. Recent genome-wide searches (GWS) have not revealed any single major locus reminiscent of BRCA1 and BRCA2, indicating that still unidentified genes may explain relatively few families each or interact in a way obscure to linkage analyses. This has drawn attention to possible benefits of studying populations where genetic heterogeneity might be reduced. We thus performed a GWS for linkage on nine Icelandic multiple-case non-BRCA1/2 families of desirable size for mapping highly penetrant loci. To follow up suggestive loci, an additional 13 families from other Nordic countries were genotyped for selected markers. METHODS: GWS was performed using 811 microsatellite markers providing about five centiMorgan (cM) resolution. Multipoint logarithm of odds (LOD) scores were calculated using parametric and nonparametric methods. For selected markers and cases, tumour tissue was compared to normal tissue to look for allelic loss indicative of a tumour suppressor gene. RESULTS: The three highest signals were located at chromosomes 6q, 2p and 14q. One family contributed suggestive LOD scores (LOD 2.63 to 3.03, dominant model) at all these regions, without consistent evidence of a tumour suppressor gene. Haplotypes in nine affected family members mapped the loci to 2p23.2 to p21, 6q14.2 to q23.2 and 14q21.3 to q24.3. No evidence of a highly penetrant locus was found among the remaining families. The heterogeneity LOD (HLOD) at the 6q, 2p and 14q loci in all families was 3.27, 1.66 and 1.24, respectively. The subset of 13 Nordic families showed supportive HLODs at chromosome 6q (ranging from 0.34 to 1.37 by country subset). The 2p and 14q loci overlap with regions indicated by large families in previous GWS studies of breast cancer. CONCLUSIONS: Chromosomes 2p, 6q and 14q are candidate sites for genes contributing together to high breast cancer risk. A polygenic model is supported, suggesting the joint effect of genes in contributing to breast cancer risk to be rather common in non-BRCA1/2 families. For genetic counselling it would seem important to resolve the mode of genetic interaction.
  BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers have a 54-85% and 45% lifetime risk of developing breast cancer, respectively, and a 18-60% and 11-27% lifetime risk of developing ovarian cancer, respectively. Oral contraceptives (OCs) significantly reduce the risk of ovarian cancer also in BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation carriers. The association between OC use and breast cancer risk in these women is controversial. Some studies showed a modestly increased risk especially among BRCA1 mutation carriers. The risk appears to be greater for women who took OCs for at least 5 years and who took OCs before the age of 30 years. Other studies reported that duration of use before first full-term pregnancy has a positive association with breast cancer risk. Salpingo-oophorectomy reduces the risk of coelomic epithelial cancer of 80-95% and the risk of breast cancer of approximately 50%. BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers should be encouraged to undergo prophylactic bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy at the age of 35-40 years or when childbearing is complete. Short-term use of hormone replacement therapy may relieve menopausal symptoms and does not appear to affect the breast cancer risk reduction obtained with salpingo-oophorectomy.
  The authors have investigated the expression of the microcephalin (MCPH1) protein to evaluate its prognostic importance in breast cancer. Microcephalin is a damage response protein involved in the regulation of BRCA1 and BRCA2. BRCA1 mutations are often associated with basal-like breast cancer, which are also often negative for oestrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and HER2. MCPH1 immunohistochemistry was performed on 319 breast cancers prepared as tissue microarray and correlated with pathology, survival, ER, PR, HER2, EGFR, CK5/6, CK14 and BRCA1 expression. After performing continuous data analysis, mean microcephalin expression decreased with increasing grade (P < 0.006). Mean microcephalin expression was lower in ER/PR negative (P < 0.001) and triple negative cancers (P < 0.004). Conversely, an association with HER2-positive cancers was also identified (P < 0.034). Reduced microcephalin also correlated with reduced nuclear BRCA1 staining (P < 0.001). No association was identified with basal markers. After dichotomising the data into low and high microcephalin expression, reduced expression was identified in 29% (93/319) of breast cancers. An association with low expression was identified in invasive ductal carcinomas with breast cancer-specific survival (BCSS) (P = 0.052). Multivariate analysis of ductal carcinomas showed that microcephalin, together with lymph node involvement and tumour size were independent predictors of BCSS (P = 0.037). Microcephalin expression is reduced in 29% of breast cancers, particularly in higher grade tumours and BRCA1-negative cases. Microcephalin is an independent predictor of BCSS in invasive ductal breast cancer patients and may prove to be a useful biomarker for the identification of aggressive breast cancers.
  Familial breast and ovarian cancers are often defective in homologous recombination (HR) due to mutations in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes. Cisplatin chemotherapy or poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors were tested for these tumors in clinical trials. In a screen for novel drugs that selectively kill BRCA2-defective cells, we identified 6-thioguanine (6TG), which induces DNA double-strand breaks (DSB) that are repaired by HR. Furthermore, we show that 6TG is as efficient as a PARP inhibitor in selectively killing BRCA2-defective tumors in a xenograft model. Spontaneous BRCA1-defective mammary tumors gain resistance to PARP inhibitors through increased P-glycoprotein expression. Here, we show that 6TG efficiently kills such BRCA1-defective PARP inhibitor-resistant tumors. We also show that 6TG could kill cells and tumors that have gained resistance to PARP inhibitors or cisplatin through genetic reversion of the BRCA2 gene. Although HR is reactivated in PARP inhibitor-resistant BRCA2-defective cells, it is not fully restored for the repair of 6TG-induced lesions. This is likely to be due to several recombinogenic lesions being formed after 6TG. We show that BRCA2 is also required for survival from mismatch repair-independent lesions formed by 6TG, which do not include DSBs. This suggests that HR is involved in the repair of 6TG-induced DSBs as well as mismatch repair-independent 6TG-induced DNA lesion. Altogether, our data show that 6TG efficiently kills BRCA2-defective tumors and suggest that 6TG may be effective in the treatment of advanced tumors that have developed resistance to PARP inhibitors or platinum-based chemotherapy.
  BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are essential in preserving the integrity of genome, and it is not unambiguously clear whether the heterozygosity status may affect BRCA1 or BRCA2 functions. This may have implications for the clinical management of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers both in breast cancer (BC) screening modality and in cancer treatment based on DNA-damaging or DNA-repair-inhibiting drugs. We investigated whether lymphocytes carrying BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations displayed an increased sensitivity to radiation or mitomycin C (MMC) in vitro treatments. Peripheral blood from 21 BRCA1 mutation carriers (12 with BC and 9 healthy), 24 BRCA2 carriers (13 with BC and 11 healthy), 15 familial BC patients without detected mutation in BRCA1 or BRCA2 and 16 controls without familial history of cancer (5 with BC and 11 healthy) were irradiated or treated with MMC. Chromosomal damage was measured using the cytokinesis-block micronucleus assay. We evaluated micronuclei (MN) and nucleoplasmic bridges (NPBs). The BRCA2 mutation carriers and familial BC patients without detected mutation in BRCA1 or BRCA2 showed less basal NPB than BRCA1 carriers and controls. The BRCA1 (+/-) or BRCA2 (+/-) lymphocytes did not have increased frequencies of MN or NPB after irradiation. In contrast, BRCA2 (+/-) lymphocytes presented higher levels of MN after MMC exposure than BRCA1 carriers and controls. The monoallelic BRCA1 or BRCA2 pathogenic mutations seem not to be associated with an enhanced radiosensitivity. The mutation of one BRCA2 allele conferred an increased sensitivity to MMC, presumably because of the role of this gene in the repair of MMC-induced DNA damage. This finding indicates that the MMC-induced MN analysis could be useful in identifying functional deficiencies of BRCA2 or genes related to BRCA2. Since MMC can be used as an anti-cancer drug, these data may be relevant for the management and follow-up of BRCA2 mutation carriers.
  PURPOSE: Increased mammographic breast density is well recognized as a breast cancer risk factor in the general population. However, it is unclear whether it is a risk factor in women with BRCA mutations. We present the results of a nested case-control screening study investigating the relationship between breast density and breast cancer incidence in this population. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Women ages 25 to 65 years with known BRCA mutations were enrolled onto a single-center, high-risk breast cancer screening program. Using a computer-aided technique (Cumulus), quantitative percentage density (PD) was measured for each participant on her baseline mammogram by a single, blinded observer. RESULTS: Between November 1997 and March 2008, 462 women (mean age, 44 years; 245 BRCA1 and 217 BRCA2) were screened and 50 breast cancers were diagnosed (38 invasive, 12 ductal carcinoma in situ [DCIS]). Density was not measured in 40 women of whom four developed cancer (three invasive, one DCIS). Mean PD (+/- standard deviation [SD]) for 376 women who did not develop breast cancer was 34% (23) compared with 31% (21) for 46 women with cancer (P = .51). Logistic regression model of breast cancer incidence and PD revealed an odds ratio of 0.99 (+/- 0.01 SD) for a one-unit increase in PD (P = .44). Results remained nonsignificant in multivariate analysis, as well as when women with pure DCIS were excluded. CONCLUSION: Increased mammographic breast density is not associated with higher breast cancer incidence in women with BRCA mutations. On the basis of these findings, density should not be considered a factor for these women in decision making regarding prophylactic surgery or chemoprevention.
  Mutations in RAD51 gene are believed to be associated with elevated breast cancer risk. However, several case-control studies focusing on the association between RAD51 135G>C and breast cancer risk failed to achieve consensus. To clarify the effect of RAD51 135G>C polymorphism on breast cancer, a meta-analysis was performed. By searching PubMed and EMBASE, a total of 14 case-control studies, containing 12,183 cases and 10,183 controls, were included. The strength of association between RAD51 135G>C polymorphism and breast cancer risk was assessed by odds ratio (OR) with the corresponding 95% confidence interval (95% CI). When all the eligible studies were pooled into the meta-analysis, an elevated cancer risk was revealed in additive model (OR, 1.34; 95% CI, 1.01-1.78; P = 0.044) and recessive model (OR, 1.37; 95% CI, 1.03-1.82; P = 0.032). In subgroup analyses by ethnicity, BRCA1/2 mutation status, and family history, a significant association was found only among BRCA2 mutation carriers (additive model: OR, 4.92; 95% CI, 1.11-21.83; P = 0.036; recessive model: OR, 4.88; 95% CI, 1.10-21.67; P = 0.037). Sensitivity analysis did not perturb the results. In conclusion, this meta-analysis suggests that RAD51 variant 135C homozygote is associated with elevated breast cancer risk among BRCA2 mutation carriers.
  Individuals at increased risk for pancreatic cancer who undergo screening can experience psychological and emotional distress. The objective of this study is to determine whether individuals participating in a pancreatic cancer screening program experience disruptions in risk perception, cancer-related anxiety or emotional distress. A pretestposttest design was used to examine perceived risk and psychological functioning of individuals participating in a pancreatic cancer screening protocol. The screening protocol includes genetic counselling, transcutaneous abdominal ultrasound, magnetic resonance imaging, and blood collection and eligible participants included individuals with a family history of pancreatic cancer or BRCA2 mutation carriers. At baseline, participants (n = 198) showed low to moderate levels of risk perception, pancreatic cancer-related anxiety, and general distress. Participants with familial pancreatic cancer (FPC) (n = 131) endorsed higher risk perception of pancreatic cancer than the BRCA2 carriers (n = 67) (perceived lifetime risk 42 vs. 15%), but did not differ on cancer worry or general distress prior to the first study appointment. From baseline to 3 months follow-up, no significant time or time by group interactions emerged on risk perception or general distress, but cancer worry decreased over time for the FPC group regardless of the number of affected relatives. Our findings indicate that participation in a pancreatic cancer screening program does not lead to a significant increase in risk perception, cancer worry, or general distress and that participants with high baseline levels of risk perception and distress may benefit from a more comprehensive risk assessment and psychological support.
  Early studies of genetic predisposition due to the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes have focused largely on sequence alterations, but it has now emerged that 4-28% of inherited mutations in the BRCA genes may be due to large genomic rearrangements of these genes. However, to date, there have been relatively few studies of large genomic rearrangements in Asian populations. We have conducted a full sequencing and large genomic rearrangement analysis (using Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification, MLPA) of 324 breast cancer patients who were selected from a multi-ethnic hospital-based cohort on the basis of age of onset of breast cancer and/or family history. Three unrelated individuals were found to have large genomic rearrangements: 2 in BRCA1 and 1 in BRCA2, which accounts for 2/24 (8%) of the total mutations detected in BRCA1 and 1/23 (4%) of the mutations in BRCA2 detected in this cohort. Notably, the family history of the individuals with these mutations is largely unremarkable suggesting that family history alone is a poor predictor of mutation status in Asian families. In conclusion, this study in a multi-ethnic (Malay, Chinese, Indian) cohort suggests that large genomic rearrangements are present at a low frequency but should nonetheless be included in the routine testing for BRCA1 and BRCA2.
  Inherited loss-of-function mutations in the tumor suppressor genes BRCA1, BRCA2, and multiple other genes predispose to high risks of breast and/or ovarian cancer. Cancer-associated inherited mutations in these genes are collectively quite common, but individually rare or even private. Genetic testing for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations has become an integral part of clinical practice, but testing is generally limited to these two genes and to women with severe family histories of breast or ovarian cancer. To determine whether massively parallel, "next-generation" sequencing would enable accurate, thorough, and cost-effective identification of inherited mutations for breast and ovarian cancer, we developed a genomic assay to capture, sequence, and detect all mutations in 21 genes, including BRCA1 and BRCA2, with inherited mutations that predispose to breast or ovarian cancer. Constitutional genomic DNA from subjects with known inherited mutations, ranging in size from 1 to >100,000 bp, was hybridized to custom oligonucleotides and then sequenced using a genome analyzer. Analysis was carried out blind to the mutation in each sample. Average coverage was >1200 reads per base pair. After filtering sequences for quality and number of reads, all single-nucleotide substitutions, small insertion and deletion mutations, and large genomic duplications and deletions were detected. There were zero false-positive calls of nonsense mutations, frameshift mutations, or genomic rearrangements for any gene in any of the test samples. This approach enables widespread genetic testing and personalized risk assessment for breast and ovarian cancer.
  Germline mutations in BRCA1/2 increase the lifetime risk for breast and ovarian cancer dramatically. Identification of such mutations is important for optimal treatment decisions and pre-symptomatic mutation screening in family members. Although current DNA diagnostics is able to identify many different mutations, it remains unclear, how many BRCA2-associated breast cancer cases remain unidentified as such. In addition, mutation scanning detects many unclassified variants (UV) for which the clinical relevance is uncertain. Therefore, our aim was to develop a test to identify BRCA2-association in breast tumors based on the genomic signature. A BRCA2-classifier was built using array-CGH profiles of 28 BRCA2-mutated and 28 sporadic breast tumors. The classifier was validated on an independent group of 19 BRCA2-mutated and 19 sporadic breast tumors. Subsequently, we tested 89 breast tumors from suspected hereditary breast (and ovarian) cancer (HBOC) families, in which either no BRCA1/2 mutation or an UV had been found by routine diagnostics. The classifier showed a sensitivity of 89% and specificity of 84% on the validation set of known BRCA2-mutation carriers and sporadic tumor cases. Of the 89 HBOC cases, 17 presented a BRCA2-like profile. In three of these cases additional indications for BRCA2-deficiency were found. Chromosomal aberrations that were specific for BRCA2-mutated tumors included loss on chromosome arm 13q and 14q, and gain on 17q. Since we could separate BRCA1-like, BRCA2-like, and sporadic-like tumors, using our current BRCA2- and previous BRCA1-classifier, this method of breast tumor classification could be applied as additional test for current diagnostics to help clinicians in decision making and classifying sequence variants of unknown significance.
  BACKGROUND: Approximately half of hereditary breast cancers have mutations in either BRCA1 or BRCA2. BRCA1 is a multifaceted tumor suppressor protein that has implications in processes such as cell cycle, transcription, DNA damage response and chromatin remodeling. This multifunctional nature of BRCA1 is achieved by exerting its many effects through modulation of transcription. Many cellular events are dictated by covalent modification of proteins, an important mechanism in regulating protein and genome function; of which protein methylation is an important posttranslational modification with activating or repressive effects. METHODS/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we demonstrate for the first time that BRCA1 is methylated both in breast cancer cell lines and breast cancer tumor samples at arginine and lysine residues through immunoprecipitation and western blot analysis. Arginine methylation by PRMT1 was observed in vitro and the region of BRCA1 504-802 shown to be highly methylated. PRMT1 was detected in complex with BRCA1 504-802 through in vitro binding assays and co-immunoprecipitated with BRCA1. Inhibition of methylation resulted in decreased BRCA1 methylation and alteration of BRCA1 binding to promoters in vivo as shown through chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Knockdown of PRMT1 also resulted in increased BRCA1 binding to particular promoters in vivo. Finally, following methylation inhibition, Sp1 was found to preferentially associate with hypo-methylated BRCA1 and STAT1 was found to preferentially associate with hyper-methylated BRCA1. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These results suggest that methylation may influence either the ability of BRCA1 to bind to specific promoters or protein-protein interactions which alters the recruitment of BRCA1 to these promoters. Thus, given the importance of BRCA1 to genomic stability, methylation of BRCA1 may ultimately affect the tumor suppressor ability of BRCA1.
  BACKGROUND: Olaparib is a novel, orally active poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor that induces synthetic lethality in homozygous BRCA-deficient cells. We aimed to assess the efficacy and safety of olaparib for treatment of advanced ovarian cancer in patients with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. METHODS: In this international, multicentre, phase 2 study, we enrolled two sequential cohorts of women (aged >or=18 years) with confirmed genetic BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations, and recurrent, measurable disease. The study was undertaken in 12 centres in Australia, Germany, Spain, Sweden, and the USA. The first cohort (n=33) was given continuous oral olaparib at the maximum tolerated dose of 400 mg twice daily, and the second cohort (n=24) was given continuous oral olaparib at 100 mg twice daily. The primary efficacy endpoint was objective response rate (ORR). This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00494442. FINDINGS: Patients had been given a median of three (range 1-16) previous chemotherapy regimens. ORR was 11 (33%) of 33 patients (95% CI 20-51) in the cohort assigned to olaparib 400 mg twice daily, and three (13%) of 24 (4-31) in the cohort assigned to 100 mg twice daily. In patients given olaparib 400 mg twice daily, the most frequent causally related adverse events were nausea (grade 1 or 2, 14 [42%]; grade 3 or 4, two [6%]), fatigue (grade 1 or 2, ten [30%]; grade 3 or 4, one [3%]), and anaemia (grade 1 or two, five [15%]; grade 3 or 4, one [3%]). The most frequent causally related adverse events in the cohort given 100 mg twice daily were nausea (grade 1 or 2, seven [29%]; grade 3 or 4, two [8%]) and fatigue (grade 1 or 2, nine [38%]; none grade 3 or 4). INTERPRETATION: Findings from this phase 2 study provide positive proof of concept of the efficacy and tolerability of genetically targeted treatment with olaparib in BRCA-mutated advanced ovarian cancer. FUNDING: AstraZeneca.
  BACKGROUND: Olaparib, a novel, orally active poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor, induced synthetic lethality in BRCA-deficient cells. A maximum tolerated dose and initial signal of efficacy in BRCA-deficient ovarian cancers have been reported. We therefore assessed the efficacy, safety, and tolerability of olaparib alone in women with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations and advanced breast cancer. METHODS: Women (aged >or=18 years) with confirmed BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations and recurrent, advanced breast cancer were assigned to two sequential cohorts in a phase 2 study undertaken in 16 centres in Australia, Germany, Spain, Sweden, the UK, and the USA. The first cohort (n=27) was given continuous oral olaparib at the maximum tolerated dose (400 mg twice daily), and the second (n=27) was given a lower dose (100 mg twice daily). The primary efficacy endpoint was objective response rate (ORR). This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00494234. FINDINGS: Patients had been given a median of three previous chemotherapy regimens (range 1-5 in cohort 1, and 2-4 in cohort 2). ORR was 11 (41%) of 27 patients (95% CI 25-59) in the cohort assigned to 400 mg twice daily, and six (22%) of 27 (11-41) in the cohort assigned to 100 mg twice daily. Toxicities were mainly at low grades. The most frequent causally related adverse events in the cohort given 400 mg twice daily were fatigue (grade 1 or 2, 11 [41%]; grade 3 or 4, four [15%]), nausea (grade 1 or 2, 11 [41%]; grade 3 or 4, four [15%]), vomiting (grade 1 or 2, three [11%]; grade 3 or 4, three [11%]), and anaemia (grade 1 or 2, one [4%]; grade 3 or 4, three [11%]). The most frequent causally related adverse events in the cohort given 100 mg twice daily were nausea (grade 1 or 2, 11 [41%]; none grade 3 or 4) and fatigue (grade 1 or 2, seven [26%]; grade 3 or 4, one [4%]). INTERPRETATION: The results of this study provide positive proof of concept for PARP inhibition in BRCA-deficient breast cancers and shows a favourable therapeutic index for a novel targeted treatment strategy in patients with tumours that have genetic loss of function of BRCA1-associated or BRCA2-associated DNA repair. Toxicity in women with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations was similar to that reported previously in those without such mutations. FUNDING: AstraZeneca.
  PURPOSE: The prevalence of BRCA(1/2) mutations in germline DNA from unselected ovarian cancer patients is 11% to 15.3%. It is important to determine the frequency of somatic BRCA(1/2) changes, given the sensitivity of BRCA-mutated cancers to poly (ADP ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP1) inhibitors and platinum analogs. PATIENTS AND METHODS: In 235 unselected ovarian cancers, BRCA(1/2) was sequenced in 235, assessed by copy number analysis in 95, and tiling arrays in 65. 113 tumors were sequenced for TP53. BRCA(1/2) transcript levels were assessed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction in 220. When available for tumors with BRCA(1/2) mutations, germline DNA was sequenced. RESULTS: Forty-four mutations (19%) in BRCA1 (n = 31)/BRCA2 (n = 13) were detected, including one homozygous BRCA1 intragenic deletion. BRCA(1/2) mutations were particularly common (23%) in high-grade serous cancers. In 28 patients with available germline DNA, nine (42.9%) of 21 and two (28.6%) of seven BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations were demonstrated to be somatic, respectively. Five mutations not previously identified in germline DNA were more commonly somatic than germline (four of 11 v one of 17; P = .062). There was a positive association between BRCA1 and TP53 mutations (P = .012). BRCA(1/2) mutations were associated with improved progression-free survival (PFS) after platinum-based chemotherapy in univariate (P = .032; hazard ratio [HR] = 0.65; 95% CI, 0.43 to 0.98) and multivariate (P = .019) analyses. BRCA(1/2) deficiency, defined as BRCA(1/2) mutations or expression loss (in 24 [13.3%] BRCA(1/2)-wild-type cancers), was present in 67 ovarian cancers (30%) and was also significantly associated with PFS in univariate (P = .026; HR = 0.67; 95% CI, 0.47 to 0.96) and multivariate (P = .008) analyses. CONCLUSION: BRCA(1/2) somatic and germline mutations and expression loss are sufficiently common in ovarian cancer to warrant assessment for prediction of benefit in clinical trials of PARP1 inhibitors.
  DNA interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) are highly toxic because they block the progression of replisomes. The Fanconi Anemia (FA) proteins, encoded by genes that are mutated in FA, are important for repair of ICLs. The FA core complex catalyzes the monoubiquitination of FANCD2, and this event is essential for several steps of ICL repair. However, how monoubiquitination of FANCD2 promotes ICL repair at the molecular level is unknown. Here, we describe a highly conserved protein, KIAA1018/MTMR15/FAN1, that interacts with, and is recruited to sites of DNA damage by, the monoubiquitinated form of FANCD2. FAN1 exhibits endonuclease activity toward 5' flaps and has 5' exonuclease activity, and these activities are mediated by an ancient VRR_nuc domain. Depletion of FAN1 from human cells causes hypersensitivity to ICLs, defects in ICL repair, and genome instability. These data at least partly explain how ubiquitination of FANCD2 promotes DNA repair.
  The 1100delC mutation of the CHEK2 gene was found to be a cause of breast cancer in 2002. The lifetime risk of breast cancer among women with a mutation and with a family history of breast cancer is approximately 25%. These women are good candidates for screening with MRI and for chemoprevention with tamoxifen. It is reasonable to test for this single mutation when women undergo testing for BRCA1 and BRCA2.
  The 'p53 signature' is a benign secretory cell outgrowth in the distal Fallopian tube that shares properties with ovarian serous cancer-including p53 mutations-and is a putative serous cancer precursor. We expanded the precursor definition to all secretory cell outgrowths (SCOUTs) of 30 or more cells and scored normal (N) and altered (A) expression of both p53 and PAX2, a gene down-regulated in ovarian and endometrial cancer. SCOUTs were identified by BCL2/p73 staining in tubes from women with serous carcinoma, inherited mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 and controls. SCOUTs were prevalent in both proximal and distal tube and significantly associated with serous carcinoma versus the others (p < 0.001); 89% were PAX2 (A) and 26% were PAX2 (A)/p53 (A) (p53 signatures). PAX2 (A)/p53 (N) SCOUTs were free of p53 mutations; however, 12 of 13 p53 signatures were PAX2 (A). A tubal carcinoma and contiguous SCOUT were p53 (A)/PAX2 (A) and shared the same p53 mutation. SCOUTs are discretely localized alterations commonly containing altered expression of multiple genes within histologically benign tubal epithelium. Geographic distribution in the tube varies by genotype and immunophenotype, from regionally unrestricted (PAX2) to greater likelihood specific area (fimbria) of shared prevalence (PAX2 and p53). This study reveals, for the first time, an entity (SCOUT) that is associated with serous cancer, expands the topography of altered PAX2 expression in the female genital tract mucosa and highlights another potential pathway disturbance involved in early serous carcinogenesis in the Fallopian tube.
  BRCA1/2 germline mutations predispose to breast and ovarian cancer. Large genomic rearrangements (LGRs) have widened the mutational spectrum of the BRCA1 gene, but the frequencies vary in different populations. In this study, we want to determine the spectrum of LGRs in BRCA1 gene in Nigerian breast cancer patients. The multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) assay was used to screen BRCA1 rearrangements in 352 patients who previously tested negative for BRCA1 and BRCA2 point mutations and small insertions/deletions. Positive MLPA result was confirmed and located by long-range PCR. The breakpoints of the candidate rearrangement were characterized by sequencing. A novel deletion of BRCA1 exon 21 (c.5277 + 480_5332 + 672del) was detected in 1 out of 352 Nigerian breast cancer patients (0.3% occurrence frequency). Further analysis of breakpoints revealed that the deletion involves two Alu-elements: one AluSg in intron 20 and the AluY in intron 21. These data suggest that while BRCA1 genomic rearrangement exists, they do not contribute significantly to BRCA1-associated risk in the Nigerian population.
  Tissue sample acquisition is a limiting step in many studies. There are many thousands of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded archival blocks collected around the world, but in contrast relatively few fresh frozen samples in tumour banks. Once samples are fixed in formalin, the RNA is degraded and traditional methods for gene expression profiling are not suitable. In this study, we have evaluated the ability of the whole genome DASL (cDNA-mediated Annealing, Selection, extension, and Ligation) assay from Illumina to perform transcriptomic analysis of archived breast tumour tissue in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) blocks. We profiled 76 familial breast tumours from cases carrying a BRCA1, BRCA2 or ATM mutation, or from non-BRCA1/2 families. We found that replicate samples correlated well with each other (r(2) = 0.9-0.98). In 12/15 cases, the matched formalin-fixed and frozen samples predicted the same tumour molecular subtypes with confidence. These results demonstrate that the whole genome DASL assay is a valuable tool to profile degraded RNA from archival FFPE material. This assay will enable transcriptomic analysis of a large number of archival samples that are stored in pathology archives around the globe and consequently will have the potential to improve our understanding and characterization of many diseases.
  Bi-allelic germline mutations of the Fanconi anemia (FA) genes, PALB2/FANCN and BRCA2/FANCD1, have been reported in a few Wilms tumor (WT) patients with an atypical FA phenotype. Therefore, we screened a random cohort of 47 Dutch WT cases for germline mutations in these two FA-genes by DNA sequencing and Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA). Although several cases appeared to carry missense variants, no bi-allelic pathogenic mutations were identified, indicating that bi-allelic mutations in these FA-genes do not contribute significantly to the occurrence of WT.
  The risk of breast cancer for unaffected men who test positive for a BRCA2 mutation is based on very few retrospective studies. We have used both retrospective and prospective analysis in 321 families with pathogenic BRCA2 mutations. Three breast cancers occurred in male first-degree relatives after family ascertainment in 4140 years of follow-up suggesting a risk of breast cancer to 80 years of 8.9%. A second analysis excluding index cases identified 16 breast cancers in 905 first-degree male relatives on which Kaplan-Meier analysis was performed after assigning carrier status. This analysis confirmed that breast cancer risk in men was 7.1% (SE 5.2-8.6%) by age 70 years and 8.4% (SE 6.2-10.6%) by age 80 years.
  Epidemiological studies have shown that one of the strongest risk factors for prostate cancer is a family history of the disease, suggesting that inherited factors play a major role in prostate cancer susceptibility. Germline mutations in BRCA2 predispose to breast and ovarian cancer with its predominant tumour suppressor function thought to be the repair of DNA double-strand breaks. BRCA2 has also been implicated in prostate cancer etiology, but it is unclear the impact that mutations in this gene have on prostate tumourigenesis. Here we have undertaken a genetic analysis in the mouse to determine the role of Brca2 in the adult prostate. We show that deletion of Brca2 specifically in prostate epithelia results in focal hyperplasia and low-grade prostate intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) in animals over 12 months of age. Simultaneous deletion of Brca2 and the tumour suppressor Trp53 in prostate epithelia gave rise to focal hyperplasia and atypical cells at 6 months, leading to high-grade PIN in animals from 12 months. Epithelial cells in these lesions show an increase in DNA damage and have higher levels of proliferation, but also elevated apoptosis. Castration of Brca2;Trp53 mutant animals led to regression of PIN lesions, but atypical cells persisted that continued to proliferate and express nuclear androgen receptor. This study provides evidence that Brca2 can act as a tumour suppressor in the prostate, and the model we describe should prove useful in the development of new therapeutic approaches.
  BRCA2 and PALB2 function together in the Fanconi anemia (FA)-Breast Cancer (BRCA) pathway. Mono-allelic and bi-allelic BRCA2 and PALB2 mutation carriers share many clinical characteristics. Mono-allelic germline mutations of BRCA2 and PALB2 are risk alleles of female breast cancer and have also been reported in familial pancreatic cancer, and bi-allelic mutations cause a severe form of Fanconi anemia. In view of these similarities, we investigated whether the prevalence of PALB2 mutations was increased in breast cancer families with the occurrence of BRCA2 associated tumours other than female breast cancer. PALB2 mutation analysis was performed in 110 non-BRCA1/2 cancer patients: (a) 53 ovarian cancer patients from female breast-and/or ovarian cancer families; (b) 45 breast cancer patients with a first or second degree relative with pancreatic cancer; and (c) 12 male breast cancer patients from female breast cancer families. One truncating PALB2 mutation, c.509_510delGA, resulting in p.Arg170X, was found in a male breast cancer patient. We conclude that germline mutations of PALB2 do not significantly contribute to cancer risk in non-BRCA1/2 cancer families with at least one patient with ovarian cancer, male breast cancer, and/or pancreatic cancer.
  OBJECTIVE: Based on considerable prospective data, risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy (RRSO) is one of the most beneficial interventions available to reduce ovarian/breast cancer risk in BRCA carriers and high-risk women. The purpose of this study was to describe the initial surgical outcomes and learning curve analysis associated with laparoendoscopic single-site (LESS) RRSO with and without hysterectomy. METHODS: A retrospective, multi-institutional analysis of BRCA carriers and women at high risk for breast/ovarian cancer who underwent LESS RRSO with and without hysterectomy in 2009 was performed. Data collected included age, BMI, procedure, operative time, length of hospital stay, postoperative pain scores, and post operative complications. Student t-test, Pearson correlation coefficient, and multivariate linear regression were used for analysis. RESULTS: A total of 58 patients were evaluated; 36 (63%) were BRCA1/2 carriers and 38 (63%) had breast cancer. Patients' mean age and BMI were 46 years and 27 kg/m(2), respectively. Most patients were Caucasian (76%), and at the time of prophylactic surgery, 53% of patients were undergoing active breast cancer treatment. Mean operative time was 38.1 minutes (16-80 minutes). All cases were performed successfully via the LESS approach, and there were no surgical complications. Multivariate linear regression analysis was done, and after controlling for study site, previous abdominal surgery, active cancer treatment, and BMI, operative time was only influence by number of cases performed, p=0.019. CONCLUSIONS: LESS RRSO is feasible and safe with favorable surgical and cosmetic outcomes. In our experience, surgical proficiency is possible after 10-15 cases. The LESS approach may be ideal for BRCA mutation carriers and breast cancer patients because of a short convalescence, permitting minimal interruption in any ongoing cancer treatment and the potential psychological benefits from improved cosmesis and pain control. Prospective studies are needed to assess the relative benefits of LESS compared with more conventional minimally invasive approaches.
  BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is one of the most common diseases affecting women. Inherited susceptibility genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2, are considered in breast, ovarian and other common cancers etiology. BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes have been identified that confer a high degree of breast cancer risk. OBJECTIVE: Our study was performed to identify germline mutations in some exons of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes for the early detection of presymptomatic breast cancer in females. METHODS: This study was applied on Egyptian healthy females who first degree relatives to those, with or without a family history, infected with breast cancer. Sixty breast cancer patients, derived from 60 families, were selected for molecular genetic testing of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. The study also included 120 healthy first degree female relatives of the patients, either sisters and/or daughters, for early detection of presymptomatic breast cancer mutation carriers. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood lymphocytes of all the studied subjects. Universal primers were used to amplify four regions of the BRCA1 gene (exons 2,8,13 and 22) and one region (exon 9) of BRCA2 gene using specific PCR. The polymerase chain reaction was carried out. Single strand conformation polymorphism assay and heteroduplex analysis were used to screen for mutations in the studied exons. In addition, DNA sequencing of the normal and mutated exons were performed. RESULTS: Mutations in both BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes were detected in 86.7% of the families. Current study indicates that 60% of these families were attributable to BRCA1 mutations, while 26.7% of them were attributable to BRCA2 mutations. Results showed that four mutations were detected in the BRCA1 gene, while one mutation was detected in the BRCA2 gene. Asymptomatic relatives, 80 (67%) out of total 120, were mutation carriers. CONCLUSIONS: BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes mutations are responsible for a significant proportion of breast cancer. BRCA mutations were found in individuals with and without family history.
  Nowadays, women develop breast and ovarian cancer more and more early. Therefore, gynecologists and primary care physicians encounter the question, whether one of their patients has a genetic predisposition for cancer. They are crucial in initiating a referral for genetic counseling as well as in caring for high risk individuals coming up with questions concerning intensified cancer screening, chemoprevention or prophylactic surgery.This review presents the actual knowledge in these topics and delivers the molecular basis of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer mainly due to mutations in the genes BRCA1 and BRCA2. Problematic aspects of the penetrance of these gene mutations are shown and its role in counseling. The important details of the personal and family history, which influence the risk assessment, are pointed out. Tools for the risk calculation are presented as well as criteria for referral for genetic counseling. The important questions, which have to be addressed in pre- and post-test counseling, are discussed. Finally, the options for women with an inherited predisposition in order to reduce their cancer risk are presented. Each of the three management options 'intensified cancer screening', 'chemoprevention' and 'prophylactic surgery' is discussed thoroughly. Recommended cancer screening in male mutation carriers are mentioned as well.
  BRCA1 and BRCA2 associated breast cancer comprises a small but important group of hereditary breast cancer. Testing for BRCA1 and BRCA2 has significant clinical and personal implications for the patients in terms of therapy and follow-up of individual family members. The sequencing of the genes is expensive and since the information derived may have a profound effect on the individual and family members, it is important that testing is done only when the risk of carrying a mutation is thought to be high. Over the last decade, researchers have developed a number of statistical models for predicting risk for harboring mutations in these genes and the risk of subsequently developing breast and ovarian cancer. These models usually take into account the type of tumor and age at occurrence as well as family history. Data from pathological analysis show that although breast tumours are heterogeneous, there are histological characteristics that are seen more frequently in carriers of BRCA1 germ line mutations compared to BRCA2 and sporadic breast cancers. A number of authors have suggested that the addition of pathological data to risk algorithms may improve the predictive power of these models and provide a more accurate way of identifying individuals who may benefit from testing. Here we review the pathology of familial breast cancer and assess the evidence to justify the use of pathology in refining risk assessment models.
  INTRODUCTION: Breast cancer is a profoundly heterogeneous disease with respect to biologic and clinical behavior. Gene-expression profiling has been used to dissect this complexity and to stratify tumors into intrinsic gene-expression subtypes, associated with distinct biology, patient outcome, and genomic alterations. Additionally, breast tumors occurring in individuals with germline BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations typically fall into distinct subtypes. METHODS: We applied global DNA copy number and gene-expression profiling in 359 breast tumors. All tumors were classified according to intrinsic gene-expression subtypes and included cases from genetically predisposed women. The Genomic Identification of Significant Targets in Cancer (GISTIC) algorithm was used to identify significant DNA copy-number aberrations and genomic subgroups of breast cancer. RESULTS: We identified 31 genomic regions that were highly amplified in > 1% of the 359 breast tumors. Several amplicons were found to co-occur, the 8p12 and 11q13.3 regions being the most frequent combination besides amplicons on the same chromosomal arm. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering with 133 significant GISTIC regions revealed six genomic subtypes, termed 17q12, basal-complex, luminal-simple, luminal-complex, amplifier, and mixed subtypes. Four of them had striking similarity to intrinsic gene-expression subtypes and showed associations to conventional tumor biomarkers and clinical outcome. However, luminal A-classified tumors were distributed in two main genomic subtypes, luminal-simple and luminal-complex, the former group having a better prognosis, whereas the latter group included also luminal B and the majority of BRCA2-mutated tumors. The basal-complex subtype displayed extensive genomic homogeneity and harbored the majority of BRCA1-mutated tumors. The 17q12 subtype comprised mostly HER2-amplified and HER2-enriched subtype tumors and had the worst prognosis. The amplifier and mixed subtypes contained tumors from all gene-expression subtypes, the former being enriched for 8p12-amplified cases, whereas the mixed subtype included many tumors with predominantly DNA copy-number losses and poor prognosis. CONCLUSIONS: Global DNA copy-number analysis integrated with gene-expression data can be used to dissect the complexity of breast cancer. This revealed six genomic subtypes with different clinical behavior and a striking concordance to the intrinsic subtypes. These genomic subtypes may prove useful for understanding the mechanisms of tumor development and for prognostic and treatment prediction purposes.
  AIMS AND BACKGROUND: The purpose of the study was to identify clinical, mammographic or sonographic abnormalities of the male breast that require histological characterization. METHODS AND STUDY DESIGN: Clinical and imaging features of 31 male patients with breast lesions were retrospectively evaluated and correlated with core needle biopsy results. RESULTS: Seven of 31 (22.6%) lesions proved to be malignant and 24 of 31 (77.4%) benign, with a benign/malignant ratio of 4.4:1. In the case of a suspicious clinical presentation (firm mass, nipple retraction) and/or the presence of risk factors for breast cancer (BRCA2 mutation, previous breast cancer), core needle biopsy always demonstrated malignancy. All malignant lesions identified on mammography (4 of 7) appeared as a mass. Benign lesions detected on mammography (21 of 24) presented as an area of increased density (20 of 21) more frequently than a mass (1 of 21). CONCLUSIONS: Sonographic features of cancers were not different from those of benign lesions. Clinical and mammographic findings, along with patient history, can be useful in the identification of male breast lesions that require core needle biopsy.
  OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study is to determine the prevalence of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations among a large series of women with carcinoma of the fallopian tube. METHODS: Two series of women diagnosed with carcinoma of the fallopian tube were studied. Women identified from the Ontario Cancer Registry who were diagnosed with fallopian tube cancer between 1990 and 1998 and between 2002 and 2004. A second, hospital-based series was identified at Cedars Sinai Medical Centre, Los Angeles, California. These women were diagnosed between 1991 and 2007. Each subject was approached to provide her family history and ethnic background and to provide a blood sample for genetic testing for mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. RESULTS: In total, 108 patients with fallopian tube cancer were recruited (70 from Ontario and 38 from Los Angeles). Thirty-three patients (30.6%) were found to have a deleterious mutation; 23 in BRCA1 (21.3%) and 10 in BRCA2 (9.3%). The prevalence of mutations was 55.6% in Jewish women and was 26.4% in non-Jewish women. A family history of ovarian or breast cancer was positive for 24 women (23.3%); of these, 14 had a mutation (58.3%). Fourteen (14.4%) of the patients had a previous history of breast cancer; of these, 10 (71.4%) had a mutation. 40.3% of the women who were diagnosed with fallopian tube cancer before age 60 had a mutation, compared with 17.4% of the women diagnosed at age 60 and above. CONCLUSIONS: Approximately 30% of women with fallopian tube cancer have a mutation in BRCA1 or BRCA2. The highest frequencies of BRCA mutations were seen in women with fallopian tube cancer diagnosed under age 60, in Jewish women, in women with a family history of breast or ovarian cancer, and in women with a personal history of breast cancer. All patients diagnosed with invasive fallopian tube cancer should be considered candidates for genetic testing.
  The nuclear poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) represents an important novel target in cancer therapy. The enzyme is essential for single strand DNA breaks repair via base excision repair pathway. Inhibition of PARP-1 exerts "synthetic lethality" effect towards the tumors with defects in DNA repair by homologous recombination, specifically the tumors with mutations in the breast cancer associated BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. Recent clinical data confirmed the early in vitro studies and suggest that PARP-1 inhibitors could be used not only as chemosensitizers but as well as single agents to selective kill tumors with defective DNA repair by homologous recombination. Such concept of "synthetic lethality" for tumors which have lost one DNA repair pathway by targeting a second DNA repair pathway, represents groundbreaking therapeutic strategy. The review highlights our current knowledge and ongoing clinical development/trials of PARP-1 inhibitors. Keywords: PARP-1 inhibitor, BRCA1, BRCA2, DNA repair, synthetic lethality.
  Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women worldwide, including Romania, where its incidence has increased significantly during the last decade. Ovarian cancer is the fourth leading cause of mortality by cancer in women. BRCA1 and BRCA2 are major cancer predisposition genes, responsible for a large percentage of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) families. We investigated 17 patients from unrelated HBOC families in north-eastern Romania, screening for mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 by mutation-specific PCR and by dideoxy sequencing. We identified four BRCA1 and two BRCA2 mutations in the 17 families. The overall mutation frequency was 41% (7/17; 5 BRCA1 and 2 BRCA2). Two mutations (BRCA1 c.2241dupC and BRCA2 c.8680C>T) were novel and not listed in the BIC database. Two recurrent BRCA1 mutations (c.5266dupC and c.181T>G), previously described among Ashkenazi Jewish and Eastern European populations, were also found. Two unclassified variants (UV) were found, one of which was novel (BRCA2 c.4589A>G). Medical follow-up for mutation carriers was implemented. Our study is the first molecular investigation of the role of the BRCA genes in breast and ovarian cancer in Romania.
  Serous tubal intraepithelial carcinoma (STIC) is detected in between 5% and 7% of women undergoing risk-reduction salpingooophorectomy for mutations in the BRCA1 or 2 genes (BRCA+), and seems to play a role in the pathogenesis of many ovarian and "primary peritoneal" serous carcinomas. The recognition of STIC is germane to the management of BRCA+ women; however, the diagnostic reproducibility of STIC is unknown. Twenty-one cases were selected and classified as STIC or benign, using both hematoxylin and eosin and immunohistochemical stains for p53 and MIB-1. Digital images of 30 hematoxylin and eosin-stained STICs (n=14) or benign tubal epithelium (n=16) were photographed and randomized for blind digital review in a Powerpoint format by 6 experienced gynecologic pathologists and 6 pathology trainees. A generalized kappa statistic for multiple raters was calculated for all groups. For all reviewers, the kappa was 0.333, indicating poor reproducibility; kappa was 0.453 for the experienced gynecologic pathologists (fair-to-good reproducibility), and kappa=0.253 for the pathology residents (poor reproducibility). In the experienced group, 3 of 14 STICs were diagnosed by all 6 reviewers, and 9 of 14 by a majority of the reviewers. These results show that interobserver concordance in the recognition of STIC in high-quality digital images is at best fair-to-good for even experienced gynecologic pathologists, and a proportion cannot be consistently identified even among experienced observers. In view of these findings, a diagnosis of STIC should be corroborated by a second pathologist, if feasible.
  PURPOSE: Although not currently recommended, genetic testing of minors for adult hereditary cancer syndromes, along with risks and benefits, is still being debated. Thus, we evaluated parent opinions regarding BRCA1/2 testing of minors, in general, and hypothetically, for parents' own minor child. METHODS: Semistructured interviews were conducted to assess parent opinions regarding BRCA1/2 testing in minors, along with parent rationale for and factors associated with these opinions. RESULTS: In total, 246 parents at two academic cancer risk assessment programs who underwent BRCA1/2 testing completed the interview (60% response rate). In response to a dichotomous question, 37% of parents supported testing minors. Responses to an open-ended query suggest that 47% support testing minors in some or all circumstances. Parent negative BRCA1/2 test result (P = .02), parent male sex (P = .03), and minority race (P = .01) were independently associated with support of testing minors. In response to a dichotomous question, 44% of parents reported hypothetical interest in testing their own minor offspring. Responses to an open-ended query suggest that 55% would consider, hypothetically, testing their child in some or all circumstances. Parent negative test result (P = .01), less than a college education (P < .01), and older mean offspring age (P = .05) were associated with interest in testing one's own child. CONCLUSION: Parents' opinions regarding BRCA1/2 testing of minors are divided. Given the lack of evidence supporting either the permission or restriction of BRCA1/2 testing in minors, further evaluation of the risks and benefits of providing genetic risk information and genetic testing to minors for adult-onset disease is needed to inform clinical practice and guidelines.
  INTRODUCTION: Five different molecular subtypes of breast cancer have been identified through gene expression profiling. Each subtype has a characteristic expression pattern suggested to partly depend on cellular origin. We aimed to investigate whether the molecular subtypes also display distinct methylation profiles. METHODS: We analysed methylation status of 807 cancer-related genes in 189 fresh frozen primary breast tumours and four normal breast tissue samples using an array-based methylation assay. RESULTS: Unsupervised analysis revealed three groups of breast cancer with characteristic methylation patterns. The three groups were associated with the luminal A, luminal B and basal-like molecular subtypes of breast cancer, respectively, whereas cancers of the HER2-enriched and normal-like subtypes were distributed among the three groups. The methylation frequencies were significantly different between subtypes, with luminal B and basal-like tumours being most and least frequently methylated, respectively. Moreover, targets of the polycomb repressor complex in breast cancer and embryonic stem cells were more methylated in luminal B tumours than in other tumours. BRCA2-mutated tumours had a particularly high degree of methylation. Finally, by utilizing gene expression data, we observed that a large fraction of genes reported as having subtype-specific expression patterns might be regulated through methylation. CONCLUSIONS: We have found that breast cancers of the basal-like, luminal A and luminal B molecular subtypes harbour specific methylation profiles. Our results suggest that methylation may play an important role in the development of breast cancers.
  Poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) polymerase 1 (PARP1) is activated by DNA single-strand breaks (SSB) or at stalled replication forks to facilitate DNA repair. Inhibitors of PARP efficiently kill breast, ovarian, or prostate tumors in patients carrying hereditary mutations in the homologous recombination (HR) genes BRCA1 or BRCA2 through synthetic lethality. Here, we surprisingly show that PARP1 is hyperactivated in replicating BRCA2-defective cells. PARP1 hyperactivation is explained by the defect in HR as shRNA depletion of RAD54, RAD52, BLM, WRN, and XRCC3 proteins, which we here show are all essential for efficient HR and also caused PARP hyperactivation and correlated with an increased sensitivity to PARP inhibitors. BRCA2-defective cells were not found to have increased levels of SSBs, and PAR polymers formed in HR-defective cells do not colocalize to replication protein A or gammaH2AX, excluding the possibility that PARP hyperactivity is due to increased SSB repair or PARP induced at damaged replication forks. Resistance to PARP inhibitors can occur through genetic reversion in the BRCA2 gene. Here, we report that PARP inhibitor-resistant BRCA2-mutant cells revert back to normal levels of PARP activity. We speculate that the reason for the sensitivity of HR-defective cells to PARP inhibitors is related to the hyperactivated PARP1 in these cells. Furthermore, the presence of PAR polymers can be used to identify HR-defective cells that are sensitive to PARP inhibitors, which may be potential biomarkers.
  PURPOSE: To define a gene expression profile of BRCAness that correlates with chemotherapy response and outcome in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). METHODS: A publicly available microarray data set including 61 patients with EOC with either sporadic disease or BRCA(1/2) germline mutations was used for development of the BRCAness profile. Correlation with platinum responsiveness was assessed in platinum-sensitive and platinum-resistant tumor biopsy specimens from six patients with BRCA germline mutations. Association with poly-ADP ribose polymerase (PARP) inhibitor responsiveness and with radiation-induced RAD51 foci formation (a surrogate of homologous recombination) was assessed in Capan-1 cell line clones. The BRCAness profile was validated in 70 patients enriched for sporadic disease to assess its association with outcome. RESULTS: The BRCAness profile accurately predicted platinum responsiveness and mutation status in eight of 10 patient-derived tumor specimens and between PARP-inhibitor sensitivity and resistance in four of four Capan-1 clones. When applied to the 70 patients with sporadic disease, patients with the BRCA-like (BL) profile had improved disease-free survival (34 months v 15 months; log-rank P = .013) and overall survival (72 months v 41 months; log-rank P = .006) compared with patients with a non-BRCA-like (NBL) profile, respectively. The BRCAness profile maintained independent prognostic value in multivariate analysis, which controlled for other known clinical prognostic factors. CONCLUSION: The BRCAness profile correlates with responsiveness to platinum and PARP inhibitors and identifies a subset of sporadic patients with improved outcome. Additional evaluation of this profile as a predictive tool in patients with sporadic EOC is warranted.
  Chromosomal translocations involving the immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGH) locus are common abnormalities in mature B-cell neoplasms. Recent findings have also revealed their significant role in B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia. As a rule, IGH translocations generate transcriptional activation of the oncogene localized in the proximity of the breakpoint. In this study, we describe a pediatric case of B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia showing microRNA-125b-1 (MIR125B1) and BLID gene overexpression, resulting from a novel t(11;14)(q24.1;q32) translocation involving IGH. This is the first report describing the upregulation of a microRNA due to its juxtaposition to protein-coding gene regulatory elements and the overexpression of two neighboring genes as a consequence of transcriptional enhancers localized in the vicinity of the IGH gene.
  Several recent studies have examined the function and evolution of a Drosophila homolog to the human breast cancer susceptibility gene BRCA2, named dmbrca2. We previously identified what appeared to be a recent expansion in the RAD51-binding BRC-repeat array in the ancestor of Drosophila yakuba. In this study, we examine patterns of variation and evolution of the dmbrca2 BRC-repeat array within D. yakuba and its close relatives. We develop a model of how unequal crossing over may have produced the expanded form, but we also observe short repeat forms, typical of other species in the D. melanogaster group, segregating within D. yakuba and D. santomea. These short forms do not appear to be identical-by-descent, suggesting that the history of dmbrca2 in the D. melanogaster subgroup has involved repeat unit contractions resulting in homoplasious forms. We conclude that the evolutionary history of dmbrca2 in D. yakuba and perhaps in other Drosophila species may be more complicated than can be inferred from examination of the published single genome sequences per species.
  Genetic and lifestyle/environmental factors are implicated in the aetiology of breast cancer. This review summarizes the current state of knowledge on rare high penetrance mutations, as well as moderate and low-penetrance genetic variants implicated in breast cancer aetiology. We summarize recent discoveries from large collaborative efforts to combine data from candidate gene studies, and to conduct genome-wide association studies (GWAS), primarily in breast cancers in the general population. These findings are compared with results from collaborative efforts aiming to identify genetic modifiers in BRCA1 and BRCA2 carriers. Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease, and tumours from BRCA1 and BRCA2 carriers display distinct pathological characteristics when compared with tumours unselected for family history. The relationship between genetic variants and pathological subtypes of breast cancer, and the implication of discoveries of novel genetic variants to risk prediction in BRCA1/2 mutation carriers and in populations unselected for mutation carrier status, are discussed.
  Alcohol consumption increases the risk of breast cancer among women in the general population, but its effect on women who carry a BRCA gene mutation is unclear. We conducted a case-control study of 1925 matched pairs of predominantly premenopausal women who carry a BRCA1 or a BRCA2 mutation. Information on current alcohol consumption was obtained from a questionnaire administered during the course of genetic counselling or at the time of enrolment. A modest inverse association between breast cancer and reported current alcohol consumption was observed among women with a BRCA1 mutation (OR = 0.82, 95% CI 0.70-0.96), but not among women with a BRCA2 mutation (OR = 1.00; 95% CI 0.71-1.41). Compared to non-drinkers, exclusive consumption of wine was associated with a significant reduction in the risk of breast cancer among BRCA1 carriers (p-trend = 0.01). Alcohol consumption does not appear to increase breast cancer risk in women carrying a BRCA gene mutation.
  The monohaloacetic acids (monoHAAs), iodoacetic, bromoacetic and chloroacetic acids are toxic disinfection byproducts. In vitro toxicological end points were integrated with DNA damage and repair pathway-focused toxicogenomic analyses to evaluate monoHAA-induced alterations of gene expression in normal nontransformed human cells. When compared to concurrent control transcriptome profiles, metabolic pathways involved in the cellular responses to toxic agents were identified and provided insight into the biological mechanisms of toxicity. Using the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery to analyze the gene array data, the majority of the altered transcriptome profiles were associated with genes responding to DNA damage or those regulating cell cycle or apoptosis. The major pathways involved with altered gene expression were ATM, MAPK, p53, BRCA1, BRCA2, and ATR. These latter pathways highlight the involvement of DNA repair, especially the repair of double strand DNA breaks. All of the resolved pathways are involved in human cell stress response to DNA damage and regulate different stages in cell cycle progression or apoptosis.
  Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC), characterized by absence of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and lack of overexpression of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), are typically associated with poor prognosis, due to aggressive tumor phenotype(s), only partial response to chemotherapy and present lack of clinically established targeted therapies. Advances in the design of individualized strategies for treatment of TNBC patients require further elucidation, by combined 'omics' approaches, of the molecular mechanisms underlying TNBC phenotypic heterogeneity, and the still poorly understood association of TNBC with BRCA1 mutations. An overview is here presented on TNBC profiling in terms of expression signatures, within the functional genomic breast tumor classification, and ongoing efforts toward identification of new therapy targets and bioimaging markers. Due to the complexity of aberrant molecular patterns involved in expression, pathological progression and biological/clinical heterogeneity, the search for novel TNBC biomarkers and therapy targets requires collection of multi-dimensional data sets, use of robust multivariate data analysis techniques and development of innovative systems biology approaches.
  BACKGROUND: Women with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations are at increased risk of breast and ovarian cancer. Oral contraceptives (OC) use has been associated with a reduction in ovarian cancer risk and with a moderately increased breast cancer risk, which tends to level off in the few years after stopping. The association between oral contraceptive and BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutations carriers is unclear. METHODS: We performed a comprehensive literature search updated to March 2010 of studies on the associations between OC users and breast or ovarian cancer for ascertained BRCA1/2 carriers. We obtained summary risk estimated for ever OC users, for duration of use and time since stopping. RESULTS: A total of 2855 breast cancer cases and 1503 ovarian cancer cases, carrying an ascertained BRCA1/2 mutation, were included in our meta-analyses, based on overall 18 studies. Use of OC was associated with a significant reduced risk of ovarian cancer for BRCA1/2 carriers (summary relative risk (SRR)=0.50; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.33-0.75). We also observed a significant 36% risk reduction for each additional 10 years of OC use (SRR: 0.64; 95% CI, 0.53-0.78; P trend<0.01). We found no evidence of a significant association between OC and breast cancer risk in carriers (SRR: 1.13; 95% CI, 0.88-1.45) and with duration of use. OC formulations used before 1975 were associated with a significant increased risk of breast cancer (SRR: 1.47; 95% 1.06, 2.04), but no evidence of a significant association was found with use of more recent formulations (SRR: 1.17; 95% 0.74, 1.86). CONCLUSIONS: OC users carrying an ascertained BRCA1/2 mutation have a reduced risk of ovarian cancer, proportional to the duration of use. There is no evidence that recent OC formulations increase breast cancer risk in carriers.
  Breast cancers related to BRCA mutations are associated with particular biological features. Here we report the clinical and pathological characteristics of breast cancer in Chinese women with and without BRCA mutations and of carriers of BRCA1 mutations compared to BRCA2 mutations. Two hundred and 26 high-risk Hong Kong Chinese women were tested for BRCA mutations, medical information was obtained from medical records, and risk and demographic information was obtained from personal interviews. In this cohort, 28 (12.4%) women were BRCA mutation carriers and among these carriers, 39.3% were BRCA1 and 60.7% were BRCA2 mutations. Mutation carriers were more likely to have a familial history of breast and ovarian cancer, high-grade cancers, and triple negative (TN) cancers. Prevalence of TN was 48.3% in BRCA carriers and 25.6% in non-carriers and was 67.7% in BRCA1 and 35.3% in BRCA2 carriers. Estrogen receptor (ER) negative cancer was significantly associated with BRCA1 mutations, especially in those under 40 years of age. BRCA-related breast cancer in this Chinese population is associated with family history and adverse pathological/prognostic features, with BRCA2 mutations being more prevalent but BRCA1 carriers having more aggressive and TN cancers. Compared to Caucasian populations, prevalence of BRCA2 mutations and TN cancer in BRCA2 mutation carriers in Chinese population are elevated.
  As single agents, chemical inhibitors of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) are nontoxic and have clinical efficacy against BRCA1- and BRCA2-deficient tumors. PARP inhibitors also enhance the cytotoxicity of ionizing radiation and alkylating agents but will only improve clinical outcomes if tumor sensitization exceeds effects on normal tissues. It is unclear how tumor DNA repair proficiency affects the degree of sensitization. We have previously shown that the radiosensitizing effect of PARP inhibition requires DNA replication and will therefore affect rapidly proliferating tumors more than normal tissues. Because many tumors exhibit defective DNA repair, we investigated the impact of double-strand break (DSB) repair integrity on the sensitizing effects of the PARP inhibitor olaparib. Sensitization to ionizing radiation and the alkylating agent methylmethane sulfonate was enhanced in DSB repair-deficient cells. In Artemis(-/-) and ATM(-/-) mouse embryo fibroblasts, sensitization was replication dependent and associated with defective repair of replication-associated damage. Radiosensitization of Ligase IV(-/-) mouse embryo fibroblasts was independent of DNA replication and is explained by inhibition of "alternative" end joining. After methylmethane sulfonate treatment, PARP inhibition promoted replication-independent accumulation of DSB, repair of which required Ligase IV. Our findings predict that the sensitizing effects of PARP inhibitors will be more pronounced in rapidly dividing and/or DNA repair defective tumors than normal tissues and show their potential to enhance the therapeutic ratio achieved by conventional DNA-damaging agents.
  The etiology of breast cancer is associated with several factors, the most important being genetic susceptibility. Both BRCA1/2 and ATM/ATR play a role in DNA repair pathways and breast cancer. The aims of our investigation were to confirm the contributions of the known polymorphisms in these genes and investigate the pattern of their interaction. A total of 360 Han Chinese blood samples were collected from 180 patients with breast cancer and 180 healthy controls. In total, five single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in these genes were genotyped using polymerase chain reaction-based restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis. Combined effects of paired SNP were tested by the Multifactor Dimensionality Reduction (MDR) method and theory of Information Gain (IG). By MDR analysis, the best model was determined to be a five-locus site model. Interaction tree by the hierarchical clustering method showed that the ATR mutant rs13091637 gave a maximum stand-alone IG value, while the ATM mutant rs611646 showed the lowest IG value but had the top interaction effect. These results suggest that combined effects of the polymorphisms in these genes may confer susceptibility to breast cancer in a Chinese Han cohort (n = 360). Each of the variants, though, performs a different role in the pathogenetic mechanism of breast cancer.
  Missense substitutions in high-risk cancer susceptibility genes create clinical uncertainty in the genetic counseling process. Multifactorial likelihood classification approaches and in vitro assays are useful for the classification of exonic sequence variants in BRCA1 and BRCA2, but these currently rely on the assumption that changes in protein function are the major biological mechanism of pathogenicity. This study investigates the potentially pathogenic role of aberrant splicing for exonic variants predicted to encode missense substitutions using patient-derived RNA. No splicing aberrations were identified for BRCA1c.5054C>T and BRCA2c.7336A>G, c.8839G>A, and c.9154C>T. However, RT-PCR analysis identified a major splicing aberration for BRCA1c.4868C>G(p.Ala1623Gly), a variant encoding a missense substitution considered likely to be neutral. Splicing aberrations were also observed for BRCA2c.7988A>T(p.Glu2663Val) and c.8168A>G(p.Asp2723Gly), but both variant and wildtype alleles were shown to be present in full-length mRNA transcripts, suggesting that variant protein may be translated. BRCA2 protein function assays indicated that BRCA2p.Glu2663Val, p.Asp2723Gly and p.Arg3052Trp missense proteins have abrogated function consistent with pathogenicity. Multifactorial likelihood analysis provided evidence for pathogenicity for BRCA1 c.5054C>T(p.Thr1685Ile) and BRCA2c.7988A>T(p.Glu2663Val), c.8168A>G(p.Asp2723Gly) and c.9154C>T(p.Arg3052Trp), supporting experimentally derived evidence. These findings highlight the need for improved bioinformatic prediction of splicing aberrations and to refine multifactorial likelihood models used to assess clinical significance.
  GEN1 was recently identified as a key Holliday junction resolvase involved in homologous recombination. Somatic truncating GEN1 mutations have been reported in two breast cancers. Together these data led to the proposition that GEN1 is a breast cancer predisposition gene. In this article we have formally investigated this hypothesis. We performed full-gene mutational analysis of GEN1 in 176 BRCA1/2-negative familial breast cancer samples and 159 controls. We genotyped six SNPs tagging the 30 common variants in the transcribed region of GEN1 in 3,750 breast cancer cases and 4,907 controls. Mutation analysis revealed one truncating variant, c.2515_2519delAAGTT, which was present in 4% of cases and 4% of controls. We identified control individuals homozygous for the deletion, demonstrating that the last 69 amino acids of GEN1 are dispensable for its function. We identified 17 other variants, but their frequency did not significantly differ between cases and controls. Analysis of 3,750 breast cancer cases and 4,907 controls demonstrated no evidence of significant association with breast cancer for six SNPs tagging the 30 common GEN1 variants. These data indicate that although it also plays a key role in double-strand DNA break repair, GEN1 does not make an appreciable contribution to breast cancer susceptibility by acting as a high- or intermediate-penetrance breast cancer predisposition gene like BRCA1, BRCA2, CHEK2, ATM, BRIP1 and PALB2 and that common GEN1 variants do not act as low-penetrance susceptibility alleles analogous to SNPs in FGFR2. Furthermore, our analyses demonstrate the importance of undertaking appropriate genetic investigations, typically full gene screening in cases and controls together with large-scale case-control association analyses, to evaluate the contribution of genes to cancer susceptibility.
  A number of models have been developed to predict the probability that a person carries a detectable germline mutation in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes. Their relative performance in a clinical setting is variable. To compare the performance characteristics of a web-based BRCA1/BRCA2 gene mutation prediction model: the PENNII model ( www.afcri.upenn.edu/itacc/penn2 ), with studies done previously at our institution using four other models including LAMBDA, BRCAPRO, modified PENNI (Couch) tables, and Myriad II tables collated by Myriad Genetics Laboratories. Proband and family cancer history data were analyzed from 285 probands from unique families (27 Ashkenazi Jewish; 277 female) seen for genetic risk assessment in a multispecialty tertiary care group practice. All probands had clinical testing for BR.CA1 and BRCA2 mutations conducted in the same single commercial laboratory. The performance for PENNII results were assessed by the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) of sensitivity versus 1-specificity, as a measure of ranking. The AUCs of the PENNII model were higher for predicting BRCA1 than for BRCA2 (81 versus 72%). The overall AUC was 78.7%. PENN II model for BRCA1/2 prediction performed well in this population with higher AUC compared with our experience using four other models. The ease of use of the PENNII model is compatible with busy clinical practices.
  BACKGROUND: Genetic screening of breast cancer patients and their families have identified a number of variants of unknown clinical significance in the breast cancer susceptibility genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2. Evaluation of such unclassified variants may be assisted by web-based bioinformatic prediction tools, although accurate prediction of aberrant splicing by unclassified variants affecting exonic splice enhancers (ESEs) remains a challenge. METHODS: This study used a combination of RT-PCR analysis and splicing reporter minigene assays to assess five unclassified variants in the BRCA2 gene that we had previously predicted to disrupt an ESE using bioinformatic approaches. RESULTS: Analysis of BRCA2 c.8308 G > A (p.Ala2770Thr) by mRNA analysis, and BRCA2 c.8962A > G (p.Ser2988Gly), BRCA2 c.8972G > A (p.Arg2991His), BRCA2 c.9172A > G (p.Ser3058Gly), and BRCA2 c.9213G > T (p.Glu3071Asp) by a minigene assay, revealed no evidence for aberrant splicing. CONCLUSIONS: These results illustrate the need for improved methods for predicting functional ESEs and the potential consequences of sequence variants contained therein.
  Recent candidate gene and genome wide association studies have revealed novel loci associated with an increased risk of breast cancer. We evaluated the effect of these breast cancer associated variants on ovarian cancer risk in individuals with familial ovarian cancer both with and without BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. A total of 158 unrelated white British women (54 BRCA1/2 mutation positive and 104 BRCA1/2 mutation negative) with familial ovarian cancer were genotyped for FGFR2, TNRC9/TOX3 and CASP8 variants. The p.Asp302His CASP8 variant was associated with reduced ovarian cancer risk in the familial BRCA1/2 mutation negative ovarian cancer cases (P = 0.016). The synonymous TNRC9/TOX3 (Ser51) variant was present at a significantly lower frequency than in patients with familial BRCA1/2 positive breast cancer (P = 0.0002). Our results indicate that variants in CASP8 and TNRC9/TOX3 alter the risk of disease in individuals affected with familial ovarian cancer.

  Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women. One in 8 women develops breast cancer and approximately 30% of all affected women die of the disease. By performing a nationwide screening program in the Netherlands, a mortality reduction of 1.2% annually was achieved. The screening program is for women between the ages of 50 and 75 years; however, women with an increased risk for developing breast cancer are mostly younger. The role of MRI in this particular group of women has been described in different studies. MRI of the breast in this group of women has a higher sensitivity than mammography, but the highest sensitivity is reached by the combination of these two imaging modalities.
  This article provides an overview of the molecular changes associated with inherited gynecologic malignancies and the incorporation of this information in the counseling of individuals at increased risk for developing malignancies, as well as conventional and emerging approaches to the screening of the general population. Cancer genetic counseling and its role in women's health care is examined. The focus is hereditary breast and ovarian cancer; however, cancer predisposition caused by genes other than BRCA1 and BRCA2 is also considered. The aim is to provide a foundation for counseling based on fundamental knowledge of the genes and their clinical consequences. The reader is then guided through the mechanics of risk assessment for individual patients, concluding with the psychosocial implications of counseling.
  Estrogen receptor (ER) alpha has been studied extensively in familial breast cancers but there are limited data on ERbeta and its isoforms. This is an important issue since many BRCA1-associated tumours are "triple negative" and are resistant to conventional and targeted therapies. We performed an immunohistochemical study of pan-ERbeta, ERbeta1 and ERbeta2 in a cohort of 123 familial breast carcinomas (35 BRCA1, 33 BRCA2 and 55 BRCAX) using a cut-off for positivity at 20% (Shaaban et al. in Clin Cancer Res 14:5228-5235, 2008). BRCA1 cancers were more likely to be nuclear ERalpha negative and nuclear pan-ERbeta positive (21/32, 66%) when compared with BRCA2 (2/29, 7%) and BRCAX cancers (11/49, 22%) (both P < 0.001). For survival analysis, expression was also stratified using cut-offs defined by Bates et al. (Breast Cancer Res Treat 111:453-459, 2008) (score out of 7). Cytoplasmic ERbeta2 expression correlated with shorter overall survival at 15 years regardless of cut-off used (both P < 0.046) At a cut-off score of 6 out of 7, cytoplasmic ERbeta2 expression correlated with a poorer response to chemotherapy in both univariate (P = 0.011) and multivariate analyses including grade, lymph node status and chemotherapy as an interaction variable (P = 0.045, Hazard ratio 1.22, 95% CI 1.004-9.87). A similar trend was seen in a univariate analysis with a cut-off of 20% although this did not reach statistical significance (P = 0.057). Expression of nuclear ERbeta1 was associated with a favourable response to endocrine therapy at 15 years regardless of cut-offs employed (both P < 0.025). However, this did not reach statistical significance in a multivariate analysis (P > 0.05). Since a significant proportion of ERalpha negative familial breast carcinomas are positive for nuclear ERbeta1 and cytoplasmic ERbeta2, the different ERbeta isoforms and their intracellular location may need to be assessed, to identify patients that may benefit from hormonal and chemotherapy.
  PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Ovarian cancer remains the gynaecological malignancy with the highest mortality in the Western world. The strategy of identifying biologically distinct subgroups of ovarian cancer by means of clinical characteristics, histology and molecular profiling is an exciting prospect in personalizing and improving therapy for ovarian cancer. RECENT FINDINGS: Preclinical recognition that BRCA1 and BRCA2-associated tumours are very sensitive to inhibition of poly-ADP ribose polymerase (PARP), a key molecule in DNA repair, led to ovarian cancer patients with germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations being treated with the PARP inhibitor olaparib (AZD2281, KU-0059436; KuDOS/Astra-Zeneca). The initial trials of olaparib in this patient population demonstrated an impressive rate of clinical benefit. Furthermore, tumours from patients with sporadic ovarian cancer have been found to commonly have somatic BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations or other defects in DNA repair, with the implication that PARP inhibition may also have a role in treating these patients. SUMMARY: In this review, we discuss DNA repair mechanisms and strategies used to target them in oncology, our current experience with PARP inhibition in BRCA1 and BRCA2-mutation associated and sporadic ovarian cancer, as well as current issues in the clinical development of these agents.
  Mutations of the PALB2 tumor suppressor gene in humans are associated with hereditary predisposition to breast and also some other cancers. In the present study, we have characterized mice deficient in Palb2. The data show that the Palb2((+/-)) mice are normal and fertile, and lack macroscopic tumors when followed up till the age of 8 months. Homozygous (HO) Palb2((-/-)) mice present with embryonic lethality and die at E9.5 at the latest. The mutant embryos are smaller in size, developmentally retarded and display defective mesoderm differentiation after gastrulation. In Palb2((-/-)) embryos, the expression of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 is increased, and Palb2((-/-)) blastocysts show a growth defect in vitro. Hence, the phenotype of the Palb2((-/-)) mice in many regards resembles those previously reported for Brca1 and Brca2 knockout mice. The similarity in the phenotypes between Palb2, Brca1 and Brca2 knockout mice further supports the functional relationship shown in vitro for these three proteins. Accordingly, our data in vivo suggest that a key function for PALB2 is to interact with and to build up appropriate communication between BRCA1 and BRCA2, thereby licensing the successful performance of the physiological tasks mediated by these two proteins, particularly in homologous recombination and in proper DNA damage response signaling.
  INTRODUCTION: Mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 confer high risks of breast cancer and ovarian cancer. The risk prediction algorithm BOADICEA (Breast and Ovarian Analysis of Disease Incidence and Carrier Estimation Algorithm) may be used to compute the probabilities of carrying mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 and help to target mutation screening. Tumours from BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers display distinctive pathological features that could be used to better discriminate between BRCA1 mutation carriers, BRCA2 mutation carriers and noncarriers. In particular, oestrogen receptor (ER)-negative status, triple-negative (TN) status, and expression of basal markers are predictive of BRCA1 mutation carrier status. METHODS: We extended BOADICEA by treating breast cancer subtypes as distinct disease end points. Age-specific expression of phenotypic markers in a series of tumours from 182 BRCA1 mutation carriers, 62 BRCA2 mutation carriers and 109 controls from the Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium, and over 300,000 tumours from the general population obtained from the Surveillance Epidemiology, and End Results database, were used to calculate age-specific and genotype-specific incidences of each disease end point. The probability that an individual carries a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation given their family history and tumour marker status of family members was computed in sample pedigrees. RESULTS: The cumulative risk of ER-negative breast cancer by age 70 for BRCA1 mutation carriers was estimated to be 55% and the risk of ER-positive disease was 18%. The corresponding risks for BRCA2 mutation carriers were 21% and 44% for ER-negative and ER-positive disease, respectively. The predicted BRCA1 carrier probabilities among ER-positive breast cancer cases were less than 1% at all ages. For women diagnosed with breast cancer below age 50 years, these probabilities rose to more than 5% in ER-negative breast cancer, 7% in TN disease and 24% in TN breast cancer expressing both CK5/6 and CK14 cytokeratins. Large differences in mutation probabilities were observed by combining ER status and other informative markers with family history. CONCLUSIONS: This approach combines both full pedigree and tumour subtype data to predict BRCA1/2 carrier probabilities. Prediction of BRCA1/2 carrier status, and hence selection of women for mutation screening, may be substantially improved by combining tumour pathology with family history of cancer.
  The nucleoside analog 2'-C-cyano-2'-deoxy-1-β-D-arabino-pentofuranosyl-cytosine (CNDAC), currently in clinical trials for hematologic malignancies, has a novel action mechanism of causing a single-strand break after its incorporation into DNA. Double-strand breaks (DSBs) are generated thereafter in vivo and, if not repaired, pose lethal impact on cell survival. This study sought to define the mechanisms by which CNDAC-induced DSBs are formed and repaired. We demonstrated that single-strand breaks induced by CNDAC incorporation into DNA were converted to DSBs when cells progressed into the subsequent S-phase. CNDAC-induced DSBs were products of replication, rather than a consequence of apoptosis. ATM, the activator of homologous recombination (HR), was essential for cell survival after CNDAC treatment in cell lines and in primary acute myeloid leukemia samples, as were the HR components, Rad51, Xrcc3, and Brca2. Furthermore, formation of sister chromatid exchanges, a hallmark of HR, increased significantly after CNDAC-treated cells had progressed into a second replication cycle. In contrast, neither the replication stress sensor ATR nor DNA-PK, the initiator of nonhomologous end-joining of DSB, was involved in repair of CNDAC-induced damage. Together, these results indicate that HR, but not nonhomologous end-joining, is the major repair or survival mechanism for DNA damage caused by CNDAC.
  BACKGROUND: In total, 5-10% of all breast cancer cases are related to gen mutations. In most cases a mutation in the BRCA1-gen and BRCA2-gen is responsible for insufficient repair of DNA damages that cause breast and ovarian cancer. CLINICAL MANAGEMENT: In patients carrying BRCA1-mutation the risk for developing breast and ovarian cancer is 87% and 40% as well as 47% and 20% for those carrying a BRCA2-mutation. Women at hereditary risk should be informed about existing recommendations for surveillance. Primary prevention of breast and ovarian cancer including prophylactic surgery (bilateral salpingoophorectomy and bilateral mastectomy) should be explained to mutation carriers. The issue of oral antihormonal therapy for prevention of breast cancer should be addressed. Psycho-social support should be offered to mutation carriers. CONCLUSIONS: The clinical management of BRCA1 and BRCA2-mutation carriers is very challenging and should be done in centres specialized in this issue.
  Telephone disclosure of BRCA1/2 molecular genetic test results has been proposed as a feasible alternative to traditional in-person results disclosure. The purpose of this study was to investigate the relationship between method of result disclosure with the patient outcome variables of knowledge, cancer worry, cancer risk perception, satisfaction, and cancer screening and prophylactic surgery behaviors. Study participants included 228 women who completed retrospective, self-administered, mailed surveys regarding their pre-test genetic counseling and results disclosure. No significant relationships were found between result disclosure method and the outcome variables investigated. A majority (90%) of individuals who received positive results by telephone returned for follow up visits. Factors which genetic counselors believed influenced their clinical decision to offer telephone disclosure, such as history of breast cancer, a priori risk of genetic mutation and family history of known mutation were not shown to significantly impact the actual disclosure method. This study suggests that telephone results disclosure is clinically appropriate when counselors utilize their clinical judgment to determine which patients are appropriate candidates.
  BACKGROUND: A novel oncogenetic clinic was established in 2002 at the Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust offering advice and specialist follow-up for families with a germline mutation in BRCA1 or BRCA2. The remit of this multidisciplinary clinic, staffed by individuals in both oncology and genetics, is to provide individualised screening recommendations, support in decision making, risk reducing strategies, cascade testing, and an extensive research portfolio. METHODS: A retrospective analysis was performed to evaluate uptake of genetic testing, risk reducing surgery and cancer prevalence in 346 BRCA1/BRCA2 families seen between January 1996 and December 2006. RESULTS: 661 individuals attended the clinic and 406 mutation carriers were identified; 85.8% mutation carriers have chosen to attend for annual follow-up. 70% of mutation carriers elected for risk reducing bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (RRBSO). 32% of unaffected women chose risk reducing bilateral mastectomy. 32% of women with breast cancer chose contralateral risk reducing mastectomy at time of diagnosis. Some women took over 8 years to decide to have surgery. 91% of individuals approached agreed to participate in research programmes. INTERPRETATION: A novel specialist clinic for BRCA1/2 mutation carriers has been successfully established. The number of mutation positive families is increasing. This, and the high demand for RRBSO in women over 40, is inevitably going to place an increasing demand on existing health resources. Our clinic model has subsequently been adopted in other centres and this will greatly facilitate translational studies and provide a healthcare structure for management and follow-up of such people who are at a high cancer risk.
  BACKGROUND: Previous publications and utilisation of risk models for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation identification suggests that multiple primary disease in an individual is a strong predictor of a BRCA1/2 mutation and that this is more predictive than the same cancers occurring in close relatives. METHODS: This study assessed the pathological mutation detection rates for BRCA1, BRCA2 and the CHEK2c.1100 delC mutation in 2022 women with breast cancer, including 100 with breast/ovary double primary and 255 with bilateral breast cancer. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Although detection rates for mutations in BRCA1/2 are high at 49% for breast/ovarian double primary and 34% for bilateral breast cancer, the differential effect of multiple primaries in an individual appears to have been overestimated, particularly in those families with only a few malignancies. Nonetheless, bilateral breast cancer does differentially enhance detection rates in strong familial aggregations. CHEK2 1100 DelC mutation rates were lower in bilateral than for unilateral cases at 0.8% compared to 2%. The detected mutation rates for isolated double primary breast and ovarian cancer was 14% (3/22) compared to 17% (17/99) for the same two primaries in two close relatives in families with no other cases of breast/ovarian cancer. Risk models may need to be adjusted if further studies corroborate these findings.
  BACKGROUND: Several founder mutations leading to increased risk of cancer among Ashkenazi Jewish individuals have been identified, and some estimates of the age of the mutations have been published. A variety of different methods have been used previously to estimate the age of the mutations. Here three datasets containing genotype information near known founder mutations are reanalyzed in order to compare three approaches for estimating the age of a mutation. The methods are: (a) the single marker method used by Risch et al., (1995); (b) the intra-allelic coalescent model known as DMLE, and (c) the Goldgar method proposed in Neuhausen et al. (1996), and modified slightly by our group. The three mutations analyzed were MSH2*1906 G->C, APC*I1307K, and BRCA2*6174delT. RESULTS: All methods depend on accurate estimates of inter-marker recombination rates. The modified Goldgar method allows for marker mutation as well as recombination, but requires prior estimates of the possible haplotypes carrying the mutation for each individual. It does not incorporate population growth rates. The DMLE method simultaneously estimates the haplotypes with the mutation age, and builds in the population growth rate. The single marker estimates, however, are more sensitive to the recombination rates and are unstable. Mutation age estimates based on DMLE are 16.8 generations for MSH2 (95% credible interval (13, 23)), 106 generations for I1037K (86-129), and 90 generations for 6174delT (71-114). CONCLUSIONS: For recent founder mutations where marker mutations are unlikely to have occurred, both DMLE and the Goldgar method can give good results. Caution is necessary for older mutations, especially if the effective population size may have remained small for a long period of time.
  Patients with germline mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes are predisposed to breast cancer. The BRCA1-associated breast cancers have distinct morphology, being more often medullary-like, triple negative and showing a 'basal' phenotype. On the other hand, BRCA2 and BRCAX cancers are a heterogeneous group without a specific phenotype. When incorporated into risk assessment models, pathology data improves prediction of carrier status. The role of BRCA1 and BRCA2 in DNA repair is being exploited to develop novel therapies, for example, using the poly-ADP-ribose polymerase inhibitors. A number of low-to-moderate-penetrant genes/loci have also been identified, but their role and contribution in breast cancer development is still under investigation.
  A single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the 5'-untranslated region (UTR) of RAD51, 135G>C (rs1801320), was reported to be associated with an increased risk of breast cancer among BRCA2 as well as BRCA1 carriers. A few studies have also investigated the genetic contribution of RAD51 135G>C to the risk of sporadic breast cancers or breast cancer in non-BRCA1/2 carriers, though the results are yet controversial and inconclusive. We, in this study, performed a more precise estimation of the relationship between 135G>C and breast cancer among non-BRCA1/2 mutation carriers by meta-analyzing the currently available evidence from the literature. A total of 12 studies involving 7,065 cases and 6,981 controls were identified. Crude odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were used to assess the strength of association. When all the studies were pooled into the meta-analysis, there was no evidence for a significant association between 135G>C and breast cancer risk in non-BRCA1/2 mutation carriers (for CC vs. GG: OR = 0.995, 95%CI: 0.741-1.336; for GC vs. GG: OR = 0.959, 95%CI: 0.869-1.057; for dominant model: OR = 0.988, 95%CI: 0.902-1.082; and for recessive model: OR = 1.037, 95%CI: 0.782-1.376). We also performed subgroup analysis by ethnicity (Caucasian) as well as did analysis using the studies fulfilling Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, and the results did not change. In summary, the present meta-analysis suggests that the RAD51 135G>C does not modify breast cancer risk in non-BRCA1/2 mutation carriers.
  BACKGROUND: Women who carry germline mutations in the breast-ovarian cancer susceptibility genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2, are at very high risk of developing breast and/or ovarian cancer. Both genes are tumour suppressor genes that protect all cells from deregulation, and there are reports of their involvement in other cancers that vary and seem to depend on the population investigated. It is therefore important to investigate the other associated cancers in different populations to assist with risk assessments. OBJECTIVES: To assess the cancer risk profile in BRCA-mutation-positive and negative South African breast-ovarian cancer families, mainly of Caucasian origin. DESIGN: Descriptive study in which the prevalence of all cancers in the pedigrees of BRCA1- and BRCA2-mutation-positive groups and a group of families without mutations in either gene were compared with the general population. RESULTS: As expected, female breast and ovarian cancer was significantly increased in all three groups. Furthermore, male breast cancer was significantly elevated in the BRCA2-positive and BRCA-negative groups. Stomach cancer prevalence was significantly elevated in the BRCA2-positive families compared with the general population. CONCLUSIONS: These results can be applied in estimation of cancer risks and may contribute to more comprehensive counselling of mutation-positive Caucasian breast and/or ovarian cancer families.
  Accumulating evidence suggests that many cancers, including BRCA1- and BRCA2-associated breast cancers, are deficient in DNA repair processes. Both hereditary and sporadic breast cancers have been found to have significant downregulation of repair factors. This has provided opportunities to exploit DNA repair deficiencies, whether acquired or inherited. Here, we review efforts to exploit DNA repair deficiencies in tumors, with a focus on breast cancer. A variety of agents, including PARP (poly [ADP-ribose] polymerase) inhibitors, are currently under investigation in clinical trials and available results will be reviewed.

  Multifactorial models developed for BRCA1/2 variant classification have proved very useful for delineating BRCA1/2 variants associated with very high risk of cancer, or with little clinical significance. Recent linkage of this quantitative assessment of risk to clinical management guidelines has provided a basis to standardize variant reporting, variant classification and management of families with such variants, and can theoretically be applied to any disease gene. As proof of principle, the multifactorial approach already shows great promise for application to the evaluation of mismatch repair gene variants identified in families with suspected Lynch syndrome. However there is need to be cautious of the noted limitations and caveats of the current model, some of which may be exacerbated by differences in ascertainment and biological pathways to disease for different cancer syndromes.
  Mutations in the two breast cancer susceptibility genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 are associated with increased risk of breast and ovarian cancer. Patients with mutations in both genes are rarely reported and often involve Ashkenazi founder mutations. Here we report the first identification of a Danish breast and ovarian cancer family heterozygote for mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. The BRCA1 nucleotide 5215G > A/c.5096G > A mutation results in the missense mutation Arg1699Gln, while the BRCA2 nucleotide 859 + 4A > G/c.631 + 4A > G is novel. Exon trapping experiments and reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR analysis revealed that the BRCA2 mutation results in skipping of exon 7, thereby introducing a frameshift and a premature stop codon. We therefore classify the mutation as disease causing. Since the BRCA1 Arg1699Gln mutation is also suggested to be disease-causing, we consider this family double heterozygote for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations.
  Growth and differentiation of colonic epithelium are regulated in the three-dimensional (3D) physiological architecture, colonic crypt, and deregulation of 3D interactions is involved in tumorigenesis. Cell-based 3D culture systems provide a suitable approach bridging the gap between two-dimensional (2D) culture and animal models. KRAS mutations are found at high frequencies in human colorectal cancer (CRC); however, KRAS-targeted cancer therapy has not been developed. Here, we have established a 3D cell culture model resembling the colonic crypt by use of HKe3 cells, human CRC HCT116 cells disrupted at activated KRAS. In this 3D colonic crypt model, HKe3 cells showed the features of time course-dependent transit-amplifying and terminal-differentiated stages, which are characteristic of normal colonic crypt. On the basis of the features of HCT116 cells, activated KRAS inhibited normal cell polarity and apoptosis in 3D culture. The expression of DNA repair-related tumor suppressor genes including TP53, BRCA1, BRCA2, and EXO-1 was markedly suppressed by activated KRAS in 3D culture but not in 2D culture. These results together suggest that activated KRAS plays critical roles in the accumulation of genetic alterations through inhibition of DNA repair genes and apoptosis and that this 3D culture model will provide a useful tool for investigating the molecular mechanisms of CRC development.
  Germ-line mutations in breast cancer 1, early onset (BRCA1) result in predisposition to breast and ovarian cancer. BRCA1-mutated tumors show genomic instability, mainly as a consequence of impaired recombinatorial DNA repair. Here we identify p53-binding protein 1 (53BP1) as an essential factor for sustaining the growth arrest induced by Brca1 deletion. Depletion of 53BP1 abrogates the ATM-dependent checkpoint response and G2 cell-cycle arrest triggered by the accumulation of DNA breaks in Brca1-deleted cells. This effect of 53BP1 is specific to BRCA1 function, as 53BP1 depletion did not alleviate proliferation arrest or checkpoint responses in Brca2-deleted cells. Notably, loss of 53BP1 partially restores the homologous-recombination defect of Brca1-deleted cells and reverts their hypersensitivity to DNA-damaging agents. We find reduced 53BP1 expression in subsets of sporadic triple-negative and BRCA-associated breast cancers, indicating the potential clinical implications of our findings.
  OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to identify risk factors for fallopian tube cancer in women with and without a BRCA mutation. METHODS: Subjects with fallopian tube cancer were identified from two sources: 1) a large international registry of women who carry a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation (n=56), and; 2) a population-based study of ovarian and fallopian tube cancer conducted in Ontario, Canada (n=66). BRCA mutation status was established for all subjects. Each subject was matched to one or more unaffected controls, for date of birth (within four years), for BRCA mutation status (negative, BRCA1, and BRCA2), for country of residence and for past history of breast cancer (yes/no). All subjects completed a questionnaire about medical history and lifestyle factors. Odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals were calculated for parity, oral contraceptive use, tubal ligation, hormone replacement therapy and body mass index, using conditional logistic regression. RESULTS: We studied 103 women with fallopian tube cancer (48 with a BRCA1 mutation, 12 with a BRCA2 mutation and 43 with no identified BRCA mutation) and 980 matched controls. Increasing parity was associated with a decreased risk of fallopian tube cancer in non-carriers (trend per birth odds ratio 0.71 (95% CI 0.52-0.97), p=0.03), in BRCA1 carriers (OR=0.79 (0.62-1.02) p=0.07) and in BRCA2 carriers (OR=0.62 (0.34-1.15), p=0.13), but was statistically significant only for non-carriers. Oral contraceptive use was associated with a reduced risk in BRCA1 carriers (trend per year of use odds ratio=0.91 (0.83-0.99), p=0.03) but not for non-carriers (OR=0.97 (0.87-1.09), p=0.64) or for BRCA2 carriers (OR=0.94 (0.80-1.11), p=0.47). Hormone replacement therapy was associated with an increased risk for fallopian tube cancer in all subjects (OR=1.07 (1.01-1.13), p=0.03), and in the subgroups stratified by mutation, however the association was not significant in the subgroups. Tubal ligation was associated with a decreased risk of fallopian tube cancer for all subjects (OR=0.64 (0.31-1.28), p=0.21), however the reduction was not significant. CONCLUSIONS: Parity and oral contraceptive use are associated with reduced risks of fallopian tube cancer. In contrast, hormone replacement therapy may be associated with an increase in the risk of fallopian tube cancer.
  BACKGROUND: The incidence of breast cancer has been on the rise in Malaysia. It is suggested that a subset of breast cancer cases were associated with germline mutation in breast cancer susceptibility (BRCA) genes. Most of the BRCA mutations reported in Malaysia were point mutations, small deletions and insertions. Here we report the first study of BRCA large genomic rearrangements (LGRs) in Malaysia. We aimed to detect the presence of LGRs in the BRCA genes of Malaysian patients with breast cancer. METHODS: Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) for BRCA LGRs was carried out on 100 patients (60 were high-risk breast cancer patients previously tested negative/positive for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations, and 40 were sporadic breast cancer patients), recruited from three major referral centres, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia Medical Centre (UKMMC), Hospital Kuala Lumpur (HKL) and Hospital Putrajaya (HPJ). Results: Two novel BRCA1 rearrangements were detected in patients with sporadic breast cancer; both results were confirmed by quantitative PCR. No LGRs were found in patients with high-risk breast cancer. The two large genomic rearrangements detected were genomic amplifications of exon 3 and exon 10. No BRCA2 genomic rearrangement was found in both high-risk and sporadic breast cancer patients. CONCLUSION: These results will be helpful to understand the mutation spectrum of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in Malaysian patients with breast cancer. Further studies involving larger samples are required to establish a genetic screening strategy for both high-risk and sporadic breast cancer patients.
  The Fanconi anaemia (FA) FANCG protein is an integral component of the FA nuclear core complex that is required for monoubiquitylation of FANCD2. FANCG is also part of another protein complex termed D1-D2-G-X3 that contains FANCD2 and the homologous recombination repair proteins BRCA2 (FANCD1) and XRCC3. Formation of the D1-D2-G-X3 complex is mediated by serine-7 phosphorylation of FANCG and occurs independently of the FA core complex and FANCD2 monoubiquitylation. FANCG contains seven tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) motifs that mediate protein-protein interactions and here we show that mutation of several of the TPR motifs at a conserved consensus residue ablates the in vivo binding activity of FANCG. Expression of mutated TPR1, TPR2, TPR5 and TPR6 in Chinese hamster fancg mutant NM3 fails to functionally complement its hypersensitivities to mitomycin C (MMC) and phleomycin and fails to restore FANCD2 monoubiquitylation. Using co-immunoprecipitation analysis, we demonstrate that these TPR-mutated FANCG proteins fail to interact with BRCA2, XRCC3, FANCA or FANCF. The interactions of other proteins in the D1-D2-G-X3 complex are also absent, including the interaction of BRCA2 with both the monoubiquitylated (FANCD2-L) and non-ubiquitylated (FANCD2-S) isoforms of FANCD2. Interestingly, a mutation of TPR7 (R563E), that complements the MMC and phleomycin hypersensitivity of human FA-G EUFA316 cells, fails to complement NM3, despite the mutated FANCG protein co-precipitating with FANCA, BRCA2 and XRCC3. Whilst interaction of TPR7-mutated FANCG with FANCF does appear to be reduced in NM3, FANCD2 is monoubiquitylated suggesting that sub-optimal interactions of FANCG in the core complex and the D1-D2-G-X3 complex are responsible for the observed MMC- and phleomycin-hypersensitivity, rather than a defect in FANCD2 monoubiquitylation. Our data demonstrate that FANCG functions as a mediator of protein-protein interactions and is vital for the assembly of multi-protein complexes including the FA core complex and the D1-D2-G-X3 complex.
  Recently, TRAIL function has been elucidated beyond its known classical role of mediating cellular homeostasis and immune surveillance against transformed cells. Here, we show how CC genotype of -716 TRAIL promoter SNP rendered risk for sporadic breast cancer as compared to the CT and TT genotypes (P (recessive model) = 0.018, OR = 1.4, 95% CI = 1.1-1.9; P (allele model) = 0.010, OR = 1.3, 95% CI = 1.1-1.7). The in silico prediction of the introduction of core Sp1/Sp3-binding motif suggested the functional significance of the SNP variation. This functional implication was validated by luciferase assay in HeLa (P = 0.026), MCF-7 (P = 0.022), HepG2 (P = 0.024), and HT1080 (P = 0.030) cells and also by real-time expression studies on tumor tissues (P = 0.01), revealing the transcriptionally repressed status of -716 T when compared to -716 C allele. The SNP-SNP interactions reflected an enhanced protective effect of CT and TT genotypes with the protective genetic backgrounds of TP53-BRCA2 (P = 0.002, OR = 0.2, 95% CI = 0.1-0.6), IFNG (P = 0.0000002, OR = 0.3, 95% CI = 0.2-0.4), and common variant Casp8 (P = 0.0003, OR = 0.5, 95% CI = 0.3-0.7). Interestingly, a comparison with clinical parameters showed overrepresented CT and TT genotypes in progressing (P = 0.041) and ER/PR negative tumors (P = 0.024/0.006). This was explained by increased apoptotic index, calculated as a ratio of selected pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic gene expression profiles, in CC genotyped tumors, favoring either intrinsic (P = 0.008,0.018) or extrinsic (P = 0.025,0.217) pathway depending upon the ER/PR status. Our study reveals for the first time that a promoter SNP of TRAIL functionally modulates the gene and consequently its role in breast cancer pathogenesis, cautioning to consider the -716 TRAIL SNP status in patients undergoing TRAIL therapy.
  PURPOSE/OBJECTIVES: To explore the decision-making process of women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutation who have chosen to undergo prophylactic mastectomy. DESIGN: Cross-sectional, qualitative, descriptive design. SETTING: Participants were recruited from an outpatient cancer prevention center in the oncology and medical genetics departments of a large university-affiliated hospital in Montreal, Quebec, Canada. SAMPLE: 10 women carrying a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation; 8 previously had had a prophylactic mastectomy and 2 were scheduled for surgery at the time of study. METHODS: Semistructured, in-depth interviews were conducted. Field notes were written and audiotapes were transcribed verbatim. The textual data were coded and analyzed. MAIN RESEARCH VARIABLES: Decision-making process for prophylactic mastectomy. FINDINGS: Two broad findings emerged. First, several intrapersonal and contextual factors interacted throughout the process to move women either closer to choosing a prophylactic mastectomy or further from the decision. Second, all women reported experiencing a "pivotal point," an emotionally charged event when the decision to have a prophylactic mastectomy became definitive. Pivotal points for patients included either receiving a positive result for a genetic mutation or a breast cancer diagnosis for herself or a family member in the context of positive mutation status. CONCLUSIONS: Decision making about prophylactic mastectomy was an affective and intuitive process incorporating contexts and their relations rather than a rational, straight-forward process of weighing pros and cons. IMPLICATIONS FOR NURSING: Supportive interventions for women in this population should explicitly address the individual and the inter-relationships of contextual factors that shape decision making about prophylactic mastectomy while recognizing important affective components involved.
  Germ-line mutations in the tumour suppressor proteins BRCA1 and BRCA2 predispose to breast and ovarian cancer. We have recently identified a Greenlandic Inuit BRCA1 nucleotide 234T>G/c.115T>G (p.Cys39Gly) founder mutation, which at that time was the only disease-causing BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation identified in this population. Here, we describe the identification of a novel disease-causing BRCA1 nucleotide 4803delCC/c.4684delCC mutation in a Greenlandic Inuit with ovarian cancer. The mutation introduces a frameshift and a premature stop at codon 1572. We have also identified a BRCA1 nucleotide 249T>A/c.130T>A (p.Cys44Ser) mutation in another Greenlandic individual with ovarian cancer. This patient share a 1-2 Mb genomic fragment, containing the BRCA1 gene, with four Danish families harbouring the same mutation, suggesting that the 249T>A/c.130T>A (p.Cys44Ser) mutation originates from a Danish ancestor. We conclude that screening of Greenlandic Inuits with high risk of breast or ovarian cancer should include sequencing of the entire BRCA1 gene.
  Breast cancer associated with BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutations differs from non-BRCA tumors in several respects. We determined whether there was any difference in CCND1 (11q13) and ZNF217 (20q13) gene amplification with respect to BRCA status. Of 40 breast cancer samples examined, 15 and 9 were from BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers, respectively, and 16 from patients without mutation. Fluorescence in situ hybridization showed that eight tumors exhibited CCND1 amplification (20%; 3 BRCA1, 3 BRCA2, 2 non-BRCA). ZNF217 amplification was observed in three of 38 cases (8%; 2 BRCA1, 1 non-BRCA). There was no significant difference in CCND1 and ZNF217 amplification between BRCA1, BRCA2 and non-BRCA tumors. CCND1 amplification was associated with decreased disease-free (P = 0.045) and overall survival (P = 0.015). BRCA1 tumors with CCND1 amplification were estrogen receptor negative, in contrast to CCND1 amplified BRCA2 and non-BRCA tumors, suggesting that concurrent CCND1 amplification and estrogen and progesterone receptor negativity may predict germline BRCA1 gene mutation. All ZNF217 amplified tumors were of the medullary histological type (P = 0.002). There was no statistical correlation between CCND1 and ZNF217 amplification and estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and ERBB2 expression and TNM classification. CCND1 amplification did not correlate with EGFR expression.
  BACKGROUND: Risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy (RRSO) is often recommended to carriers of deleterious breast cancer gene 1/2 (BRCA1/2) mutations in order to reduce their breast cancer risk by 50% and their ovarian cancer risk by approximately 95%. To evaluate the acceptance, timing, histopathology findings and follow-up results we retrospectively analyzed a cohort of BRCA1/2 mutation carriers who underwent risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomies. METHODS: Between 1996 and 2009, 306 women who tested positive for a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation were counseled for preventive options. RRSO was recommended to all mutation carriers at age 40 or 5 years prior to the earliest occurrence of ovarian cancer in the family. Data from 175 BRCA mutation carriers (92 BRCA1 and 83 BRCA2), who decided to undergo a RRSO, were analyzed. Data were collected from study entry until recent follow-up. RESULTS: Fifty-seven percent of BRCA mutation carriers opted for RRSO. Mean age at time of surgery was 47 years. Overall, one occult carcinoma of the fallopian tube was detected at the time of surgery in a 57-year-old woman and one primary peritoneal carcinoma occurred 26 months after RRSO in a 59-year-old woman. CONCLUSION: Risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy is widely accepted. Recommendation of surgery at the age of 40 seems to be safe and the frequency of extraovarian primary peritoneal carcinoma after surgery is low.
  The aim of this study was to verify whether histopathological features of extratumoral and of primary tumor breast tissue could play a role in identifying patients with familial characteristics. We examined the clinicopathological features of 504 patients with sporadic or familial breast cancer stratified for risk of BRCA mutation. Patients with a higher risk of being carrier of BRCA gene mutations were significantly associated with tumor poor differentiation (p=0.003), positive lymph node invasion (p=0.02) and presence of vascular peritumoral invasion (p=0.008). Among the extra-tumoral lesions, only the epithelial proliferative lesions were related to higher mutation risk both in the overall series and familial patients (p<0.0001 and p=0.003, respectively). Interestingly, a significant difference in terms of high mutation risk was observed in usual ductal hyperplasia lesions (UDH), (p=0.002). We suggest that vascular peritumoral invasion and UDH lesions could predict a higher mutation risk of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes and help in individuating patient candidates to further molecular analysis.
  Women who are at high risk of breast cancer can be offered more intensive surveillance or prophylactic measures, such as surgery or chemoprevention. Central to decisions regarding the level of prevention is accurate and individualized risk assessment. This review aims to distill the diverse literature and provide practicing clinicians with an overview of the available risk assessment methods. Risk assessments fall into two groups: the risk of carrying a mutation in a high-risk gene such as BRCA1 or BRCA2 and the risk of developing breast cancer with or without such a mutation. Knowledge of breast cancer risks, taken together with the risks and benefits of the intervention, is needed to choose an appropriate disease management strategy. A number of models have been developed for assessing these risks, but independent validation of such models has produced variable results. Some models are able to predict both mutation carriage risks and breast cancer risk; however, to date, all are limited by only moderate discriminatory accuracy. Further improvements in the knowledge of how to best integrate both new risk factors and newly discovered genetic variants into these models will allow clinicians to more accurately determine which women are most likely to develop breast cancer. These steady and incremental improvements in models will need to undergo revalidation.
  Disparities in clinical outcomes of breast cancer have been described among different racial and ethnic groups in the U.S. Convincing data exist showing that Latina women have a lower incidence of breast cancer but a higher breast cancer-related mortality rate compared with white women. Noticeable differences in breast cancer incidence are present even within different Latina subsets with a higher incidence in second- and third-generation women compared with foreign born. An increasing amount of data exists pointing to significant differences in the genetics and biology of breast cancer in Latinas as a significant contributor to the higher mortality, including a higher incidence of triple-negative breast cancers (which do not overexpress HER-2 protein and are negative for estrogen receptors and progesterone receptors). Other social and environmental factors are likely to play a significant role as well, including a lower rate of screening mammography, variable access to medical care, among others. Recent data are inconclusive regarding differences among racial/ethnic groups in the response to chemotherapy. Data on racial/ethnic variations in the pharmacogenomics of chemotherapy, endocrine treatments, and toxicity are more limited, with some data suggesting differences in frequencies of polymorphisms of genes involved in the metabolism of some of these agents. Further studies are needed on this subject.
  Genetic testing for inherited susceptibility to breast and ovarian cancer can be compared with similar testing for colorectal cancer as a "natural experiment." Inherited susceptibility accounts for a similar fraction of both cancers and genetic testing results guide decisions about options for prophylactic surgery in both sets of conditions. One major difference is that in the United States, Myriad Genetics is the sole provider of genetic testing, because it has sole control of relevant patents for BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, whereas genetic testing for familial colorectal cancer is available from multiple laboratories. Colorectal cancer-associated genes are also patented, but they have been nonexclusively licensed. Prices for BRCA1 and 2 testing do not reflect an obvious price premium attributable to exclusive patent rights compared with colorectal cancer testing, and indeed, Myriad's per unit costs are somewhat lower for BRCA1/2 testing than testing for colorectal cancer susceptibility. Myriad has not enforced patents against basic research and negotiated a Memorandum of Understanding with the National Cancer Institute in 1999 for institutional BRCA testing in clinical research. The main impact of patenting and licensing in BRCA compared with colorectal cancer is the business model of genetic testing, with a sole provider for BRCA and multiple laboratories for colorectal cancer genetic testing. Myriad's sole-provider model has not worked in jurisdictions outside the United States, largely because of differences in breadth of patent protection, responses of government health services, and difficulty in patent enforcement.
  PURPOSE: Aurora kinase A (Aurora-A) is known to regulate genomic instability and tumorigenesis in multiple human cancers. The underlying mechanism, however, is not fully understood. We examined the molecular mechanism of Aurora-A regulation in human ovarian cancer. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Retrovirus-mediated small hairpin RNA (shRNA) was used to silence the expression of Aurora-A in the ovarian cancer cell lines SKOV3, OVCA432, and OVCA433. Immunofluorescence, Western blotting, flow cytometry, cytogenetic analysis, and animal assay were used to test centrosome amplification, cell cycle alteration, apoptosis, DNA damage response, tumor growth, and genomic instability. Immunostaining of BRCA2 and Aurora-A was done in ovarian, pancreatic, breast, and colon cancer samples. RESULTS: Knockdown of Aurora-A reduced centrosome amplification, malformation of mitotic spindles, and chromosome aberration, leading to decreased tumor growth. Silencing Aurora-A attenuated cell cycle progression and enhanced apoptosis and DNA damage response by restoring p21, pRb, and BRCA2 expression. Aurora-A was inversely correlated with BRCA2 in high-grade ovarian serous carcinoma, breast cancer, and pancreatic cancer. In high-grade ovarian serous carcinoma, positive expression of BRCA2 predicted increased overall and disease-free survival, whereas positive expression of Aurora-A predicted poor overall and disease-free survival (P < 0.05). Moreover, an increased Aurora-A to BRCA2 expression ratio predicted poor overall survival (P = 0.047) compared with a decreased Aurora-A to BRCA2 expression ratio. CONCLUSION: Aurora-A regulates genomic instability and tumorigenesis through cell cycle dysregulation and BRCA2 suppression. The negative correlation between Aurora-A and BRCA2 exists in multiple cancers, whereas the expression ratio of Aurora-A to BRCA2 predicts ovarian cancer patient outcome.
  PURPOSE: Carriers of BRCA1/2 mutations are at high lifetime risk of breast cancer (BC); however, the BC onset broadly vary in individual patients. Recently, polyglutamine (poly-Q) repeat length polymorphism of the amplified in breast cancer 1 (AIB1) gene was analyzed as a risk factor influencing BC onset in BRCA1/2 mutation carriers with contradictory results. METHODS: We genotyped AIB1 poly-Q repeat in 243 BRCA1/2 mutation carriers, 61 patients with familial BC (negatively tested for the presence of BRCA1/2 mutation), 221 patients with sporadic BC, and 176 non-cancer controls using denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography and statistically evaluated the effect of AIB1 poly-Q repeat length polymorphism on BC onset. RESULTS: Having used previously published statistical analyses of AIB1 poly-Q repeat length (>/=28 and >/=29 repeat cutpoints or analysis of AIB1 poly-Q repeat length as continuous variable), we did not find any association between AIB1 poly-Q repeat length and BC development in analyzed BC groups. However, the analysis of individual genotypes revealed that AIB1 genotype consisting of 28/28 glutamine repeats served as a protective factor in BRCA1 mutation carriers (HR = 0.64; 95% CI 0.41-0.99; P = 0.045) and as a risk factor in carriers of mutation in exon 11 of the BRCA2 gene (HR = 3.50; 95% CI 1.25-9.78; P = 0.017). CONCLUSIONS: Our results confirm that AIB1 poly-Q repeat length polymorphism does not influence the BC risk in general but suggest that the specific AIB1 genotypes should be considered in patients with BC carrying mutation in the BRCA1/2 genes.
  Elastofibroma is a rare, benign fibrous proliferation that most commonly occur in periscapular soft tissues and is characterized by accumulated elastic fibers. Although the lesion is generally regarded as a reactive process, an unusual fibroblastic pseudotumor or as a fibroelastic tumor-like lesion, its etiology remains unknown. Cytogenetic studies in these lesions detected chromosomal instability and some recurrent clonal chromosomal changes, which raised the possibility that the lesion represents a neoplastic process. Here, we report the genomic alterations detected by array-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) and by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) in two cases of elastofibroma. Both cases showed losses on 1p, 13q, 19p, and 22q by aCGH. In addition, deletion of CASR (3q21), GSTP1 (11q13), BRCA2 (13q12) and gains on APC (5q21) and PAH (12q23) were observed by MLPA in both samples. Genomic screening studies of this fibrous proliferation may lead to identify chromosomal regions containing genes involved in the development of elastofibromas.
  p53 maintains genome integrity either by regulating the transcription of genes involved in cell cycle, apoptosis, and DNA repair or by interacting with partner proteins. Here we provide evidence for a direct physical interaction between the tumor suppressors p53 and BRCA2. We found that the transactivation domain of p53 made specific interactions with the C-terminal oligonucleotide/oligosaccharide-binding-fold domains of BRCA2 (BRCA2(CTD)). A second distinct site situated on the p53 DNA-binding domain, bound to a region containing BRC repeats of BRCA2 (BRCA2([BRC1-8])) and may contribute synergistically for high affinity association of intact full-length proteins. Overexpression of BRCA2 and BRCA2(CTD) suppressed the transcriptional activity of p53 with a concomitant reduction in the expression of p53-target genes such as Bax and p21. Consequently, p53-mediated apoptosis was significantly attenuated by BRCA2. The observed physical association of p53 and BRCA2 may have important functional implications in the p53 transactivation-independent suppression of homologous recombination and suggests a possible interregulatory role for both proteins in apoptosis and DNA repair.
  Here we report the fabrication of a 3-pixel electrochemical DNA sensor array via potential-assisted "click" chemistry. We found that the sensors in the array exhibit close to identical sensor performance when compared to sensors constructed via conventional "click" chemistry.
  Recent studies have identified single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that significantly modify breast cancer risk in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers. Since these risk modifiers were originally identified as genetic risk factors for breast cancer in genome-wide association studies (GWASs), additional risk modifiers for BRCA1 and BRCA2 may be identified from promising signals discovered in breast cancer GWAS. A total of 350 SNPs identified as candidate breast cancer risk factors (P < 1 x 10(-3)) in two breast cancer GWAS studies were genotyped in 3451 BRCA1 and 2006 BRCA2 mutation carriers from nine centers. Associations with breast cancer risk were assessed using Cox models weighted for penetrance. Eight SNPs in BRCA1 carriers and 12 SNPs in BRCA2 carriers, representing an enrichment over the number expected, were significantly associated with breast cancer risk (P(trend) < 0.01). The minor alleles of rs6138178 in SNRPB and rs6602595 in CAMK1D displayed the strongest associations in BRCA1 carriers (HR = 0.78, 95% CI: 0.69-0.90, P(trend) = 3.6 x 10(-4) and HR = 1.25, 95% CI: 1.10-1.41, P(trend) = 4.2 x 10(-4)), whereas rs9393597 in LOC134997 and rs12652447 in FBXL7 showed the strongest associations in BRCA2 carriers (HR = 1.55, 95% CI: 1.25-1.92, P(trend) = 6 x 10(-5) and HR = 1.37, 95% CI: 1.16-1.62, P(trend) = 1.7 x 10(-4)). The magnitude and direction of the associations were consistent with the original GWAS. In subsequent risk assessment studies, the loci appeared to interact multiplicatively for breast cancer risk in BRCA1 and BRCA2 carriers. Promising candidate SNPs from GWAS were identified as modifiers of breast cancer risk in BRCA1 and BRCA2 carriers. Upon further validation, these SNPs together with other genetic and environmental factors may improve breast cancer risk assessment in these populations.
  Slater EP, Langer P, Niemczyk E, Strauch K, Butler J, Habbe N, Neoptolemos JP, Greenhalf W, Bartsch DK. PALB2 mutations in European pancreatic cancer families. Recently, PALB2 was reported to be a new pancreatic cancer susceptibility gene as determined by exomic sequencing, as truncating PALB2 mutations were identified in 3 of 96 American patients with familial pancreatic cancer (FPC). Representing the European Registry of Hereditary Pancreatitis and Familial Pancreatic Cancer (EUROPAC) and the German National Case Collection for Familial Pancreatic Cancer (FaPaCa), we evaluated whether truncating mutations could also be detected in European FPC families. We have directly sequenced the 13 exons of the PALB2 gene in affected index patients of 81 FPC families. An index patient was defined as the first medically identified patient, stimulating investigation of other members of the family to discover a possible genetic factor. None of these patients carried a BRCA2 mutation. We identified three (3.7%) truncating PALB2 mutations, each producing different stop codons: R414X, 508-9delAG and 3116delA. Interestingly, each of these three families also had a history of breast cancer. Therefore, PALB2 mutations might be causative for FPC in a small subset of European families, especially in those with an additional occurrence of breast cancer.
  Women with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations have an elevated risk of breast cancer and ovarian cancer, but also of developing second primary breast cancer. BRCA1/2 mutation carriers with breast cancer must choose between breast conservation (BCT) and mastectomy (M) yet data on outcomes are limited. The purpose of this study is to compare long-term outcome following BCT and M in BRCA1/2 carriers. 655 women with BRCA1/2 mutations diagnosed with breast cancer and treated with BCT (n = 302) or M (n = 353) were identified and underwent follow-up to assess local, regional, and systemic recurrence. Local failure as first failure was significantly more likely in those treated with BCT compared to M, with a cumulative estimated risk of 23.5 vs. 5.5%, respectively, at 15 years (P < 0.0001); 15-year estimates in carriers treated with BCT and chemotherapy was 11.9% (P = 0.08 when compared to M). Most events appeared to be second primary cancers rather than failure to control the primary tumor. The risk of contralateral breast cancer was high in all groups, exceeding 40%, but was not statistically significantly different by use of adjuvant radiotherapy (RT) or not, suggesting no added risk from scatter RT at 10 and 15 years. There were no differences seen in regional or systemic recurrences between the BCT and M groups, and no difference in overall survival. In conclusion, BRCA1/2 mutation carriers with breast cancer have similar survival whether treated with M or BCT. However, women undergoing BCT have an elevated risk of a second in-breast event that is significantly reduced in the presence of chemotherapy. Contralateral breast cancer events are very common.
  OBJECTIVE: To estimate the incidence of genetic counseling referral for ovarian cancer patients who are at substantial risk for a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation. METHODS: An analysis was performed of new ovarian cancer patients who were seen at a comprehensive cancer center from January 1, 1999, through December 31, 2007. Patients at substantial (more than 20-25%) risk for a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation were identified and records reviewed for referral to genetic counseling. Time to referral was estimated using the Kaplan-Meier method. RESULTS: A total of 3,765 epithelial ovarian cancer patients were seen during the 9-year period. On average, 23.8% of patients met substantial-risk criteria for BRCA mutations. In 1999, only 12% of patients at substantial-risk were referred. Referral improved over time with 48% referred in 2007 (P<.001). Newly diagnosed patients were more often referred for genetic counseling than new patients with recurrent disease or those seen as second opinions. African-American women meeting substantial-risk criteria were less likely to be referred than were white or Hispanic women (P=.009). CONCLUSION: Although dictated family history was accurate, interpretation of risk for BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations and subsequent referral to genetic counseling was poor. Although there was significant improvement over time, 50% of substantial-risk patients still were missed. Systematic efforts to identify those ovarian cancer patients at substantial risk for a BRCA1 or BRCA2 are necessary.
  OBJECTIVE: Women with a BRCA1/2 mutation or members of a hereditary breast ovarian cancer family (HBOC) have an increased risk of developing ovarian cancer. The only effective strategy to reduce this risk is a risk reducing salpingo-oophorectomy (RRSO). The aim of this study was to evaluate the short-term surgical outcome and safety of a RRSO. PATIENT AND METHODS: Included were all consecutive women with a BRCA1/2 mutation or members of a HBOC family who visited our Family Cancer Clinic between September 1995 and March 2006, and choose for RRSO. RESULTS: 159 women were included, of which 97 (61.0%) BRCA1 and 32 (20.1%) BRCA2 mutation carriers, and 30 women of a HBOC family (18.9%). The median age at RRSO was 42.9 years (30.3-61.1) in the BRCA1 group, 48.4 years (33.5-66.9) in the BRCA 2 group and 46.4 (32.8-68.7) years in the HBOC group (p=0.02). The median body mass index (BMI) was 24.9 kg/m(2), 30.1% were overweighed (BMI 25-30) and 18.7% were obese (BMI>30). The RRSO was performed by primary laparoscopy (n=154) or laparotomy (n=5). Intraoperatively, one (0.6%) major complication occurred and laparoscopy was converted to laparotomy. In one patient (0.6%) a minor complication occurred. Post-operatively five minor complications (3.1%) were observed. Median hospital stay was 1 day (0-13 days). CONCLUSION: Laparoscopic RRSO in BRCA1/2 mutation carriers seems to be a safe procedure with a low intraoperative and post-operative complication rate (1.3% and 3.1% respectively), a low conversion rate (0.6%) and a short median hospital stay (1.0 day).
  A 42-year-old woman presented with localized irritation, erythema and sharp pain in the one breast. After unsuccessful treatment for mastitis, an oncology consultation was obtained. A breast biopsy revealed an invasive carcinoma and a diagnosis of inflammatory breast cancer was made. The patient was treated with neo-adjuvant chemotherapy and subsequently underwent bilateral mastectomy. A total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy was also performed at the same time due to the presence of a pelvic mass. Morphologic and immunohistochemical examination of the specimens helped to clarify the correct diagnosis of primary ovarian carcinoma with widespread metastases to bilateral breasts.
  PURPOSE: To compare the frequency of visceral relapse of BRCA1/2-deficient ovarian cancer to that of nonhereditary controls. PATIENTS AND METHODS: All patients diagnosed in Scotland with epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) or primary peritoneal cancer (PPC) and a germline BRCA1/2 mutation were identified. Those with previous malignancy were excluded. Each remaining patient who experienced relapse was matched with two nonhereditary controls. RESULTS: Seventy-nine patients with EOC/PPC and germline BRCA1/2 mutations were identified. Fifteen had inadequate clinical data, two had carcinosarcoma, 27 had previous breast cancer, and 16 were in remission. Of the remaining 19 patients who were BRCA1/2 deficient, 14 patients (74%) developed visceral metastases compared with six (16%) of 38 patients in the control group. The percentages of liver, lung, and splenic metastases were 53%, 32%, and 32%, respectively, in the patients compared with 5%, 3%, and 5%, respectively, in the controls. When events occurring outside the matched follow-up period were omitted, the percentages of visceral, liver, lung, and splenic metastases were 58%, 42%, 16%, and 32% in the patients compared with 5%, 0%, 0%, and 3% in controls (P < .001, P < .001, P = .066, and P = .011, respectively). In an independent validation set, the corresponding percentages of visceral, liver, lung, and splenic metastases were 63%, 46%, 13%, and 17% in the patients compared with 11%, 4%, 2%, and 2% in controls (P < .001, P < .001, P = .153, and P = .052, respectively). CONCLUSION: Although sporadic EOC commonly remains confined to the peritoneum, BRCA1/2-deficient ovarian cancer frequently metastasizes to viscera. These data extend the ovarian BRCAness phenotype, imply BRCA1/2-deficient ovarian cancer is biologically distinct, and suggest that patients with visceral metastases should be considered for BRCA1/2 sequencing.
  PURPOSE: Selective tumor cell cytotoxicity can be achieved through a synthetic lethal strategy using poly(ADP)-ribose polymerase (PARP) inhibitor therapy in BRCA1/2 mutation carriers in whom tumor cells have defective homologous recombination (HR) DNA repair. Platinum-based chemotherapy responses correlate with HR DNA repair capacity. Olaparib is a potent, oral PARP inhibitor that is well tolerated, with antitumor activity in BRCA1/2 mutation carriers. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with BRCA1/2-mutated ovarian cancer were treated with olaparib within a dose-escalation and single-stage expansion of a phase I trial. Antitumor activity was subsequently correlated with platinum sensitivity. RESULTS: Fifty patients were treated: 48 had germline BRCA1/2 mutations; one had a BRCA2 germline sequence change of unknown significance, and another had a strong family history of BRCA1/2-associated cancers who declined mutation testing. Of the 50 patients, 13 had platinum-sensitive disease, 24 had platinum-resistant disease, and 13 had platinum-refractory disease (according to platinum-free interval). Twenty (40%; 95% CI, 26% to 55%) achieved Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) complete or partial responses and/or tumor marker (CA125) responses, and three (6.0%) maintained RECIST disease stabilization for more than 4 months, giving an overall clinical benefit rate of 46% (95% CI, 32% to 61%). Median response duration was 28 weeks. There was a significant association between the clinical benefit rate and platinum-free interval across the platinum-sensitive, resistant, and refractory subgroups (69%, 45%, and 23%, respectively). Post hoc analyses indicated associations between platinum sensitivity and extent of olaparib response (radiologic change, P = .001; CA125 change, P = .002). CONCLUSION: Olaparib has antitumor activity in BRCA1/2 mutation ovarian cancer, which is associated with platinum sensitivity.
  The enzyme poly(ADP)-ribose polymerase-1 (PARP-1) plays an important role in the repair of DNA damage via a mechanism called base excision repair (BER). Initially, inhibition of PARP-1 showed to be a promising anti-tumor strategy in preclinical models using BRCA1 and BRCA2 deficient tumor cell lines. More recently, several small molecules targeting PARP-1 entered the clinic and demonstrated compelling anti-tumor activity in patients with BRCA deficient breast and ovarian cancers, and in patients with triple-negative breast cancer. In this review we aim to summarize the most recent advances in the development of PARP inhibitors, with a focus on the clinical data.
  In the past few years, ovarian cancer research has focused increasingly on disease prevention; but an increasing number of women refer to gynecology and clinical genetics clinics with a family history of ovarian cancer and inherited familial mutations. The interest on the issue has increased also due to the identification of BReast CAncer1 (BRCA1) and BRCA2 genes mutations. The importance of recognizing the characteristics of hereditary ovarian cancer (HOC) and manage women at risk appropriately will provide more accurate care of the high-risk population. Women at risk can be identified by pedigree analysis and may receive counseling from interdisciplinary cancer genetics clinics, while those at high risk need to receive genetic testing. Risk calculation programs define risks and assist in decision-making in clinical options and genetic testing; they provide information on the risks of the disease, mutation status, and the use of genetic testing in the management of high-risk families. Furthermore, while a large number of surrogate preliminary markers have been identified, there are still limited studies on ovarian cancer genomics. Different options for risk management of HOC are available: surveillance, chemoprevention and prophylactic surgery. Surveillance in HOC high-risk patients is still not accurate. Chemoprevention is currently a controversial topic, because a number of major issues still need to be addressed in developing and testing agents for ovarian cancer chemoprevention. Prophylactic surgery has been shown to effectively decrease cancer risk, and it has the possibility to substantially reduce ovarian cancer mortality.
  RAD51 is a key factor in homologous recombination (HR) and plays an essential role in cellular proliferation by repairing DNA damage during replication. The assembly of RAD51 at DNA damage is strictly controlled by RAD51 mediators, including BRCA1 and BRCA2. We found that human RAD51 directly binds GEMIN2/SIP1, a protein involved in spliceosome biogenesis. Biochemical analyses indicated that GEMIN2 enhances the RAD51-DNA complex formation by inhibiting RAD51 dissociation from DNA, and thereby stimulates RAD51-mediated homologous pairing. GEMIN2 also enhanced the RAD51-mediated strand exchange, when RPA was pre-bound to ssDNA before the addition of RAD51. To analyze the function of GEMIN2, we depleted GEMIN2 in the chicken DT40 line and in human cells. The loss of GEMIN2 reduced HR efficiency and resulted in a significant decrease in the number of RAD51 subnuclear foci, as observed in cells deficient in BRCA1 and BRCA2. These observations and our biochemical analyses reveal that GEMIN2 regulates HR as a novel RAD51 mediator.
  PURPOSE: BLID is a BH3-like motif containing apoptotic member of the Bcl-2 family of proteins. This study was designed to investigate the mechanism of BLID-induced apoptosis and to assess the significance of BLID expression in breast cancer. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The interaction between BLID and Bcl-X(L) was examined using in vitro transcription/translation, coimmunoprecipitation, and immunoflourescence assays. The relationship between BLID mRNA expression and pathologic measures in breast cancer specimens (n = 55) was examined using the publicly available ONCOMINE microarray database. Immunohistochemistry was done using formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections of 148 cases of invasive ductal breast carcinomas (IDC) and 58 cases of invasive lobular breast carcinomas, and breast tissue microarrays representing additional 437 cases (>85% IDC) with associated clinicopathologic database and long-term clinical follow-up (median 7 years). RESULTS: BLID was found to interact with Bcl-X(L), and the binding was enhanced in cancer cells exposed to doxorubicin or cisplatin. Exogenous expression of BLID correlated with activation of Bax and an increase in cytosolic cytochrome c. BLID mRNA expression was significantly reduced in grade 3 relative to grade 1 and 2 breast cancer (P = 0.023). Cytoplasmic BLID immunoreactivity was absent in IDC compared with invasive lobular breast carcinoma (P < 0.001). Lack of BLID expression was associated with younger age (median 40 years), African American ethnicity, tumor size, and triple-negative breast cancer (estrogen receptor negative, progesterone receptor negative, and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 negative; all P < 0.005). Significant correlations were observed between BLID negativity and declines in overall, cause-specific, and local relapse-free survival (all P < 0.03). Multivariate analysis indicated that BLID is an independent prognostic factor of distant metastasis-free survival (hazard ratio, 0.302; 95% confidence interval, 0.160-0.570, P = 0.0002). CONCLUSION: BLID is a new binding partner of Bcl-X(L) and a significant prognostic factor in breast cancer.
  BRCA1 and BRCA2 are tumor suppressor genes, familial mutations in which account for approximately 5% of breast cancer cases in the USA annually. Germ line mutations in BRCA1 that truncate or inactivate the protein lead to a cumulative risk of breast cancer, by age 70, of up to 80%, whereas the risk of ovarian cancer is 30-40%. For germ line BRCA2 mutations, the breast cancer cumulative risk approaches 50%, whereas for ovarian cancers, it is between 10 and 15%. Both BRCA1 and BRCA2 are involved in maintaining genome integrity at least in part by engaging in DNA repair, cell cycle checkpoint control and even the regulation of key mitotic or cell division steps. Unsurprisingly, the complete loss of function of either protein leads to a dramatic increase in genomic instability. How they function in maintaining genome integrity after the onset of DNA damage will be the focus of this review.
  Multiple lines of evidence suggest that genetic factors modify the cancer risks in carriers of mutations in Mendelian cancer syndromes. We review the latest evidence for genetic modifiers of risk for four Mendelian cancer syndromes. In general, candidate gene studies have not been very successful at identifying modifier genes and most studies have been underpowered, but recently polymorphisms identified through genome wide association studies of unselected cancer patients and controls have been shown to modify cancer risk in studies of large numbers of mutation carriers. This approach has identified two genetic variants that are associated with colorectal cancer risk in Lynch Syndrome, and five polymorphisms that are associated with the risk of breast cancer for BRCA1 and/or BRCA2 mutation carriers. As predicted from the association between these five polymorphisms and risk of estrogen-positive or estrogen-negative breast cancer in the general population, differential associations of these polymorphisms with breast cancer risk were found for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers presumably because BRCA1 breast cancer tumors are predominantly ER-negative and are biologically distinct from BRCA2 breast cancers. These findings suggest that studies of mutation carriers may be useful for identifying genetic variants associated with different disease subtypes. The current literature underlies the need for increased international collaboration between individual studies, and the continued recruitment of mutation carriers, in order to reliably estimate and identify the genetic modifiers of risk in Mendelian cancer syndromes.
  Risk assessment evaluation and breast cancer (BRCA) testing can occur in situations where a woman considers herself to be at increased risk for developing breast cancer or her physicians, either during routine evaluation or after diagnosis of unilateral breast cancer, consider her to be at risk for harboring a genetic predisposition to breast malignancy. This study examined the impact of risk assessment counseling on trends in breast surgery and cost of care. A retrospective chart review was performed from January 1, 1999 to December 31, 2008 for women older than 18 years who underwent breast surgery for malignancy or prophylaxis, had at least 1-year follow-up, and underwent genetic counseling. From the total number of women treated at our institution who underwent unilateral or bilateral mastectomy, we identified 102 women who underwent genetic counseling and selected 199 patients who did not undergo counseling to create a 4:1 retrospective case-control study. Patients who underwent BRCA gene testing and/or counseling were compared with patients who did not (controls). The study was powered at 70%, and alpha was set at 0.05. Counseled patients were >9 times more likely to undergo bilateral mastectomies (odds ratio = 9.18). They were younger (46.4 vs. 61.8) and incurred higher total costs ($10,810 vs. $7,266) (P < 0.002). The same trend was observed in each group. In counseled and control groups, younger women chose bilateral mastectomies (mean 44.4; 55.5), whereas older women chose unilateral procedures (mean 49.8; 63.02) (P < 0.014). Total cost for bilateral mastectomies was greater than unilateral mastectomies for both groups. Of 55 counseled patients undergoing mastectomies (85 breasts), 78 (92%) breasts were reconstructed, whereas 113 (49%) of 230 breasts were reconstructed in the control group. There was a statistically significant association between counseling with BRCA testing and decision to undergo bilateral as opposed to unilateral mastectomies. Younger women were also more likely to choose bilateral mastectomies whether or not they underwent counseling. Furthermore, a greater proportion of counseled women who underwent reconstruction opted to have bilateral implants. At our institution, younger women tend to choose costlier options.
  The aim of this study was to examine the negative predictive value for a panel of serum markers in women at high risk for developing ovarian cancer. A total of 201 serum samples were collected and analyzed from 102 women at "high risk" for ovarian cancer: 26 with primary ovarian cancer, 31 with recurrent ovarian cancer, 28 with benign gynecologic diseases, and 14 with other cancers. Samples were tested for cancer antigen (CA) 125 II, CA19-9, CA72-4, CA15-3, and macrophage colony-stimulating factor, OVX1, and the marker values were further used as input to be evaluated by a previously trained artificial neural network (ANN). CA125 alone identified 72% of the primary ovarian cancers at a specificity of 95%. If either CA125 or CA72-4 were elevated, sensitivity rose to 80%. Adding macrophage colony-stimulating factor-improved sensitivity to 84% and when CA15-3 was included, a sensitivity of 88% was achieved. Specificity of the four marker panel was, however, reduced to 82.5%. By contrast, at the same sensitivity of 88%, the ANN exhibited a much higher specificity at 92.5% (p = 0.0105). Our data suggest that the combined use of multiple biomarkers improve sensitivity in women at high risk for ovarian cancer. In contrast to the simple "or" combination rule, the ANN was able to achieve a higher sensitivity without significant loss in specificity.
  DNA-repair mechanisms play an important role in the maintenance of DNA integrity and protection against DNA damage. Deregulation of these mechanisms is associated with the development of cancer as is seen in breast tumours with mutations in genes like BRCA1 and BRCA2. Recent biologic findings suggest that in tumours in which one DNA repair pathway is deficient, concomitant inhibition of other repair pathways could have potential synergistic activity. Pharmacological inhibition of Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP), a key element of the base excision repair pathway, can have synthetic lethality in tumours with deficient homologous recombination. These findings have paved the way for the clinical development of PARP inhibitors in breast tumours especially in patients with germline mutations in the BRCA1 and/or BRCA2, a population known to have deficient homologous recombination. Patients with sporadic breast cancer, especially those with a basal-like profile may also develop cancer which is deficient in DNA repair and may be susceptible to PARP inhibition. In this review we will update the clinical and biological data underlying the development of drugs targeting DNA repair with a focus on breast cancer.
  Identification of mutations in the BRCA2 gene and estimation of their clinical consequences for women and men treated in the Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center Warsaw, Poland in the years 1998-2008. The probands (97 women and 8 men) had a family history of breast and ovarian cancer (median age 46). The presence of molecular changes was examined in DNA isolated from peripheral blood lymphocytes. Germline mutations in 27 exons of the BRCA2 gene were screened by 'touchdown' PCR amplification, DHPLC and sequencing. Missense mutations were classified by multiple-sequences alignments of orthologous BRCA2 protein sequences with T-Coffee software. 39 molecular changes (8 novel) were identified in the BRCA2 gene in 105 investigated patients. In 12 patients the following pathogenic mutations were identified: 5467insT, 6174delT, 6192delAT, 6675delTA, 8141del5, 9152delT, 9326insA, 9631delC, IVS23-2A > G and E394X. The presence of 10 missense type mutations was detected including the following: D1420O, T1915 M, N3124I. The determination of pathogenic status of molecular variants detected in BRCA2 gene, described in the BIC mutation database as 'UV' depends on many parameters. Important is the assessment of the evolutionary conservation of their protein sequences and studying of the frequency of molecular variants detected in breast cancer patients and in population. A high diversity was found of the pathogenic mutations detected in BRCA2 gene in the Polish population.
  BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to identify BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in the Estonian population. We analyzed genetic data and questionnaire from 64 early-onset (< 45 y) breast cancer patients, 47 familial cases (patients with breast or ovarian cancer and a case of these cancers in the family), and 33 predictive cases (patients without breast or ovarian cancer, with a family history of such diseases) from Estonia for mutations in the BRCA1 gene. A sub-set of familial cases and predictive cases were also analyzed for mutations in the BRCA2 gene. METHODS: For mutation detection, we used the Polymerase Chain Reaction-Single Stranded Conformation Polymorphism Heteroduplex Analysis (PCR-SSCP-HD), followed by direct DNA sequencing. RESULTS: We identified three clinically important mutations in the BRCA1 gene, including seven occurrences of the c.5382insC mutation, three of c.4154delA, and one instance of c.3881_3882delGA. We also detected six polymorphisms: c.2430T>C, c.3232A>G, c.4158A>G, c.4427T>C, c.4956A>G, and c.5002T>C. Four sequence alterations were detected in introns: c.560+64delT, c.560+ [36-38delCTT, 52-63del12], c.666-58delT, and c.5396+60insGTATTCCACTCC. In the BRCA2 gene, two clinically important mutations were found: c.9610C>T and c.6631delTTAAATG. Additionally, two alterations (c.7049G>T and c.7069+80delTTAG) with unknown clinical significance were detected. CONCLUSIONS: In our dataset, the overall frequency of clinically important BRCA1 mutations in early-onset patients, familial cases, and predictive testing was 7.6% (144 cases, 11 mutation carriers). Pathogenic mutations were identified in 4 of the 64 early-onset breast cancer cases (6.3%). In familial cases, clinically important mutations in the BRCA1 gene were found in 6 of the 47 individuals analyzed (12.8%). In predictive cases, 1 clinically important mutation was detected in 33 individuals studied (3%). The occurrence of clinically important mutations in BRCA2 in familial cases of breast cancer was 2 of the 16 individuals analyzed (12.5%).
  AIMS: In screening studies of women with BRCA mutations, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) plus mammography has >90% sensitivity for detecting breast cancer, with negligible benefit from the addition of breast self-examination (BSE) or clinical breast examination (CBE). Yet CBE is still frequently recommended, and BSE is encouraged for these women. We sought to determine the attitudes of high-risk women toward CBE and BSE. METHODS: Between November 2005 and May 2006, 137 women with BRCA mutations participating in a screening study consisting of annual MRI and mammography plus semiannual CBE were asked to complete a mailed Likert-type questionnaire. RESULTS: Of the 94 (67%) respondents, mean age 47 (range 28-67), 94% strongly agreed or agreed that CBE was an important way to detect breast cancer, and almost all believed it provided an important connection to the healthcare team. Only 10% said it increased anxiety. Of the 71 (77%) who performed BSE at least occasionally, 53 thought that regular BSE gave them a sense of control over their own health. Of the 21(23%) who did not practice BSE at all, only 3 did not believe that BSE was helpful, and it made 9 more worried about breast cancer CONCLUSIONS: Although CBE adds little to cancer detection rates in women with BRCA mutations screened with MRI, the majority of these women considered CBE to be reassuring and an important means of connecting with the healthcare team. Compliance with BSE was only moderate, but it gave a significant proportion of women a greater sense of control.
  Mammalian cells are frequently at risk of DNA damage from both endogenous and exogenous sources. Accordingly, cells have evolved the DNA damage response (DDR) pathways to monitor and assure the integrity of their genome. In cells, the intact and effective DDR is essential for the maintenance of genomic stability and it acts as a critical barrier to suppress the development of cancer in humans. Two central kinases for the DDR pathway are ATM and ATR, which can phosphorylate and activate many downstream proteins for cell cycle arrest, DNA repair, or apoptosis if the damages are irreparable. In the last several years, we and others have made significant progress to this field by identifying BRIT1 (also known as MCPH1) as a novel key regulator in the DDR pathway. BRIT1 protein contains 3 breast cancer carboxyl terminal (BRCT) domains which are conserved in BRCA1, MDC1, 53BP1, and other important molecules involved in DNA damage signaling, DNA repair, and tumor suppression. Our in vitro studies revealed BRIT1 to be a chromatinbinding protein required for recruitment of many important DDR proteins (ATM, MDC1, NBS1, RAD51, BRCA2) to the DNA damage sites. We recently also generated the BRIT1 knockout mice and demonstrated its essential roles in homologous recombination DNA repair and in maintaining genomic stability in vivo. In humans, BRIT1 is located on chromosome 8p23.1, where loss of hetero-zigosity is very common in many types of cancer. In this review, we will summarize the novel roles of BRIT1 in DDR, describe the relationship of BRIT1 deficiency with cancer development, and also discuss the use of synthetic lethality approach to target cancers with HR defects due to BRIT1 deficiency.
  Reports of BRCA genetic mutations and risk of death or recurrence are inconsistent. This study aimed to compare overall and disease-free breast cancer survival rates between BRCA1/2 mutation carriers and non-carriers for short-term and long-term outcomes separately. We searched the PUBMED and EMBASE databases and retrieved 452 articles using keywords that included breast cancer, BRCA mutation, and survival. Seventeen articles were selected for systematic review and among them 11 were included in our meta-analysis. We used the random-effects model to calculate the summary hazard ratio and corresponding 95% confidence interval. BRCA1 mutation carriers had significantly lower short-term and long-term overall survival rates (OSR) relative to non-carriers (HR = 1.92 [95% CI = 1.45-2.53]; 1.33 [1.12-1.58], respectively), while both short-term and long-term OSR of BRCA2 carriers did not differ from non-carriers (HR = 1.30 [95% CI = 0.95-1.76]; 1.12 [95% CI = 0.86-1.45], respectively). For short-term progression-free survival rate (PFSR), BRCA1 mutation carriers had a significantly lower rate than non-carriers (HR = 1.54 [95% CI = 1.12-2.12]), while BRCA2 mutation carriers had a similar PFSR (HR = 1.23 [95% CI = 0.96-1.58]). For long-term PFSRs, we found no significant results. Our results suggest that BRCA1 mutation decreases short-term and long-term OSRs and short-term PFSR, however, BRCA2 mutation does not affect either short-term or long-term survival rate, which is attributed to the different carcinogenic pathways for BRCA1 and BRCA2.

  Double heterozygosity (DH) for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations is a very rare finding, particularly in non-Ashkenazi individuals, and only a few cases have been reported to date. In addition, little is known on the pathological features of the tumors that occur in DH cases and on their family history of cancer. Four carriers of pathogenic mutations in both BRCA1 and BRCA2 were identified among women who underwent genetic counseling for hereditary susceptibility to breast and ovarian carcinoma at three different Italian institutions. Clinical, pathological, and family history data were collected from medical records and during genetic counseling sessions. All identified DH cases developed breast carcinoma and three of them were also diagnosed with ovarian carcinoma. Mean ages of breast and ovarian cancer diagnosis were 42.7 and 48.6 years, respectively. The majority of breast cancers showed a BRCA1-related phenotype, being negative for hormone receptors and HER2. Two cases reported different gastrointestinal tumors among relatives. Although the individuals described in this study show more severe clinical features in comparison to previously reported BRCA1 and BRCA2 DH cases, our observations support the hypothesis of a non specific phenotype of DH cases in terms of age of disease onset. In addition, our observations indicate that in DH patients breast carcinogenesis appears to be driven mainly by the mutations in BRCA1. The possible association of DH for BRCA gene mutations with gastrointestinal tumors is in keeping with previous reports, but needs to be confirmed by further analyses.
  PURPOSE: Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors selectively target homologous recombination (HR)-defective cells and show good clinical activity in hereditary breast and ovarian cancer associated with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. A high proportion (up to 50%) of sporadic epithelial ovarian cancers (EOC) could be deficient in HR due to genetic or epigenetic inactivation of BRCA1/BRCA2 or other HR genes. Therefore, there is a potential for extending the use of PARP inhibitors to these patients if HR status can be identified. We developed a functional assay of HR status in primary cultures of EOCs based on Rad51 focus formation that correlates well with sensitivity to the potent PARP inhibitor AG014699. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Primary cultures were derived from ascitic fluid from patients with EOCs. HR status was investigated by gammaH2AX and Rad51 focus formation by immunofluorescence. Cytotoxicity to PARP inhibitors was tested by sulforhodamine B and survival assay. RESULTS: Twenty-five cultures were evaluated for HR status and cytotoxicity to PARP inhibitor. Following exposure to AG014699, there was an increase in Rad51 foci (HR competent) in 9 of 24 (36%) but no increase (HR deficient) in 16 of 24 (64%) cultures. Cytotoxicity was observed in 15 of 16 (93%) HR-deficient samples but not in 9 of 9 HR-competent samples following 24-hour exposure to 10 mumol/L AG014699. CONCLUSION: HR status can be determined in primary cancer samples by Rad51 focus formation, and this correlates with in vitro response to PARP inhibition. Use of this assay as a biomarker now needs testing in the setting of a clinical trial.
  Mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes confer a high risk of breast and ovarian cancer but the incomplete penetrance of these mutations suggests that other genetic and/or environmental factors may modify this risk. We present a family where all affected members carried a mutation in the BRCA1 gene and the index case had suffered from cancer twice in the last 27 years, whereas her monozygotic twin sister, also a carrier of the mutation, remained healthy. As copy number variants (CNVs) contribute to phenotypic diversity, a comparative genomic hybridization array (CGH) was performed to see whether the differences in the CNV profile were a modifier factor of the phenotype in our monozygotic twins. Our results show that differences in the CNVs profile were not the cause of the extremely variable penetrance observed in our MZ twin. The search for an explanation should not therefore be limited to genetic changes at the level of the DNA sequence.
  PURPOSE: Women with breast cancer diagnosed early in life comprise a substantial portion of those tested for BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations; however, little information is available on the subsequent risks of contralateral breast cancer in mutation carriers. This study assessed the risk of subsequent contralateral breast cancer associated with carrying a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation. PATIENTS AND METHODS: In this nested case-control study, patients with contralateral breast cancer diagnosed 1 year or more after a first primary breast cancer (n = 705) and controls with unilateral breast cancer (n = 1,398) were ascertained from an underlying population-based cohort of 52,536 women diagnosed with a first invasive breast cancer before age 55 years. Interviews and medical record reviews were used to collect risk factor and treatment histories. All women were tested for BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations. Relative (rate ratios) and absolute (5- and 10-year cumulative) risks of developing contralateral breast cancer following a first invasive breast cancer were computed. RESULTS: Compared with noncarriers, BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers had 4.5-fold (95% CI, 2.8- to 7.1-fold) and 3.4-fold (95% CI, 2.0- to 5.8-fold) increased risks of contralateral breast cancer, respectively. The relative risk of contralateral breast cancer for BRCA1 mutation carriers increased as age of first diagnosis decreased. Age-specific cumulative risks are provided for clinical guidance. CONCLUSION: The risks of subsequent contralateral breast cancer are substantial for women who carry a BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation. These findings have important clinical relevance regarding the assessment of BRCA1/BRCA2 status in patients with breast cancer and the counseling and clinical management of patients found to carry a mutation.
  Inactivation or loss of the tumour suppressor Ras associated domain family 1 isoform A (RASSF1A) allele has been described in breast cancer. Recently, a missense polymorphism predicting p.A331S in RASSF1A was associated with an increased risk of breast cancer and early-onset breast cancer in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers. We genotyped p.A331S RASSF1A in 854 independent, familial, white breast cancer patients (645 BRCA mutation negative, 119 BRCA1 and 90 BRCA2 positive) and compared the genotype in 331 healthy women. The RASSF1A p.A331S variant was not more common in the familial breast cancer cases than in the controls (P = 0.27). Subset analysis demonstrated no association in the BRCA1 (P = 0.26), BRCA2 (P = 0.16) or BRCA negative (P = 0.30) samples. Hence, the RASSF1A p.A331S polymorphism is not confirmed as a significant germline contributor to familial breast cancer susceptibility.
  Breast cancer is one of the most frequent tumors in women, and BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes play a major role in the hereditary susceptibility for this disease. Until the age of 70 women carrying a mutation in BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene have a 45-85% probability of developing breast cancer, and 11-62% probability of developing ovarian cancer. Mutation carrier's tumors contain nonfunctional BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes, which in healthy cells are involved in DNA repair. These tumors show an increased sensitivity to DNA damaging chemical agents and to PARP (poly(adenosine diphosphate-ribose) polymerase1) inhibitors. New targeted therapies already in use are directed toward tumors of mutation carriers. Successful treatment is most likely to be achieved through cooperation of a pathologist, oncologist and a genetic laboratory performing BRCA genes mutation screening.
  Germline mutations in the tumor-suppressor gene BRCA2 predispose to breast and ovarian cancer. BRCA2 plays a well-established role in maintaining genome stability by regulating homologous recombination. BRCA2 has more recently been implicated in cytokinesis, the final step of cell division, but the molecular basis for this remains unknown. We have used time-lapse microscopy, recently developed cytokinesis assays and BAC recombineering (bacterial artificial chromosome recombinogenic engineering) to investigate the function and localization of BRCA2 during cell division. Our analysis suggests that BRCA2 does not regulate cytokinesis in human cells. Thus, cytokinesis defects are unlikely to contribute to chromosomal instability and tumorigenesis in BRCA2-related cancers.
  The two major susceptibility genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2, are involved in hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome. Early detection of mutation carriers has crucial clinical importance, as it allows identification of women who may benefit from intensive clinical follow-up or prophylactic surgery. Generally accepted inclusion criteria for BRCA1/2 mutation testing are based either upon family history of breast or ovarian cancer or young age at cancer diagnosis. In order to analyze the impact of BRCA1/2 mutations on breast cancer development in the Czech population and to confront the clinical and histopathological data of mutation carriers with current criteria for mutation testing we examined the frequency of mutations in unselected breast cancer cases. Mutational analysis of BRCA1/2 genes performed in 679 unselected female breast cancer patients included all recurrent deleterious alterations previously identified in the Prague area and truncating mutations in the whole exon 11 of BRCA1. Within analyzed gene sequences more than 80% of mutations were identified previously in high-risk patients. A total of 16 breast cancer patients (2.4%) carried a mutation. BRCA1 mutations were identified in 14 (2.1%) whereas BRCA2 in 2 (0.3%) women. Family history of ovarian cancer was a strong predictor of a BRCA1/2 mutation (OR = 8.3; p = 0.01), however, family history of breast cancer was not indicative of carrier status. A significant association between medullary breast cancer and mutation status was observed. Current criteria for BRCA1/2 mutation testing would distinguish only 6 out of 16 (37.5%) carriers identified in our study. Ten breast cancer patients with confirmed BRCA1/2 germ-line mutation exhibited no clinical characteristics that would predict their carrier status. Therefore, we believe that the testing for BRCA1/2 mutations in the Czech Republic may not be restricted only to high-risk patients. Our results indicate that analysis of locally prevalent BRCA1/2 mutations in all breast cancer patients might extend substantially the percentage of identified mutation carriers.
  We previously showed that about 80% of breast cancer patients at high risk to carry mutation in BRCA genes presented at least one polymorphism in these genes which resulted potentially harmful by in silico analysis. In the present paper, the genealogic transmission of those polymorphic coding and noncoding variants of BRCA genes in family's members has been investigated. Thirty families, enrolled within the Genetic Counselling Program of our Institute, with probands and at least one-first degree relative (n = 67 family members) available, have been studied for both BRCA1 and BRCA2 pathological mutation and polymorphic variants' transmission. Ten and 6 probands carried Mendelian transmitted mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2, respectively. Polymorphic coding and noncoding variants were transmitted in each family's relatives with a frequency ranging from 42 to 100%, with similar rate for each SNP in mutated and nonmutated families with the only exception of BRCA1 K1183R significantly more frequent in mutated families (P = 0.004); conversely, this SNP and BRCA2 N372H, were more frequently present in breast cancer relatives belonging to families in which pathological BRCA mutations were not present. Furthermore, specific haplotypes were transmitted in all relatives as BRCA1 871Leu-1038Gly, present in both BRCA mutated and nonmutated families, while BRCA2 289His-991Asp-IVS14+53 C>T present only in BRCAX families suggesting the harmful role of these SNPs. In conclusion, analysis of SNPs maps and modality of their transmission could identify further susceptibility markers and provide a basis for a better DNA-based cancer classification.
  Although DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) are substrates for homologous recombination (HR) repair, it is becoming apparent that DNA lesions produced at replication forks, for instance by many anticancer drugs, are more significant substrates for HR repair. Cells defective in HR are hypersensitive to a wide variety of anticancer drugs, including those that do not produce DSBs. Several cancers have mutations in or epigenetically silenced HR genes, which explain the genetic instability that drives cancer development. There are an increasing number of reports suggesting that mutation or epigenetic silencing of HR genes explains the sensitivity of cancers to current chemotherapy treatments. Furthermore, there are also many examples of re-expression of HR genes in tumours to explain drug resistance. Emerging data suggest that there are several different subpathways of HR, which can compensate for each other. Unravelling the overlapping pathways in HR showed that BRCA1- and BRCA2-defective cells rely on the PARP protein for survival. This synthetic lethal interaction is now being exploited for selective treatment of BRCA1- and BRCA2-defective cancers with PARP inhibitors. Here, I discuss the diversity of HR and how it impacts on cancer with a particular focus on how HR can be exploited in future anticancer strategies.
  The two far ends of the age at the diagnosis of breast cancer are the age of younger than 35, and that of older than 70. Most probably, these two groups of patients differ in many ways. The aim of our present study was to underline the fact that age at the diagnosis of breast cancer is indeed a prognostic factor. Between October 1995 and March 2009, 80 old and 51 young breast cancer patients were treated at the Department of Diagnostic Radiology and Oncotherapy, Semmelweis University, Budapest. The prognostic and predictive factors of the tumors were analysed together with the disease-free and overall survival data. There were statistically significant differences between the two groups concerning the menstrual and reproductive factors, histological characteristics and immunophenotype of the tumors. Tumor size, nodal status and the Nottingham Prognostic Index did not show statistically significant differences. A trend to a shorter disease-free survival, higher rate of distant metastases and disease-specific death was seen in the group of young patients, but it was not significant. Overall survival was significantly shorter in the group of young patients. Therefore, we can state that young patients have a more aggressive disease and worse outcome. There is an increased importance of self examination in these groups, since both age groups are beyond the age limits of the screening population in Hungary. The media and primary school education as well should be involved in educating women concerning this aspect. The individual follow-up of young patients with positive family history should also be established.
  The majority of familial breast and ovarian cancers arise from mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. Amplification at the 11q13.5 locus is commonly observed in breast and ovarian cancers. In 2003, Hughes-Davies et al. identified a novel gene (EMSY) at this locus which binds BRCA2 within a region deleted in some cancers. Although little is known about the cellular role of EMSY, indirect evidence suggests that this nuclear protein is capable of silencing the activation potential of BRCA2. In this study we aimed to investigate expression of the EMSY gene and its protein product in sporadic ovarian cancer. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR was performed in 50 ovarian cancer and 17 normal ovarian tissue samples. Overexpression of the EMSY gene was found in 6/50 cases (12%), but in none of the control samples. To determine the EMSY protein by Western blotting, semi-quantitative analysis of the EMSY protein was performed using the Scion Image Gel Analysis Program. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS 11.5. All patients having EMSY overexpression also displayed increased levels of the EMSY protein. Sporadic ovarian cancer shows overexpression of EMSY at a prevalence similar to that found in breast cancer and the overexpression is correlated with the protein level.
  To date, five moderate-risk breast cancer susceptibility genes have been convincingly identified: CHEK2, ATM, BRIP1, PALB2, and NBS1. Moderate-risk breast cancer alleles confer increased breast cancer risks of two to fourfold compared to the 10% risk in the general population. In contrast to the high-risk BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, moderate-risk genes typically have a limited number of variants that confer breast cancer risks. The prevalence of the variants usually varies widely among different geographical or ethnic populations, ranging from essentially absent up to 1.5% (i.e. 'rare' variants). Since moderate-risk breast cancer alleles are clinically not recognizable when inherited as single mutant, one usually encounters them in a polygenic setting and consequently in incomplete cosegregation with the breast cancer phenotype. As a result, discovery of moderate-risk breast cancer genes requires conclusive statistical evidence from association studies of hundreds of breast cancer cases and population-matched controls.
  This study investigated the association between positive genetic diagnosis for BRCA1/2 mutations and sleep quality in Ashkenazi asymptomatic women. Seventy-three women, including 17 asymptomatic BRCA1/2 carriers and 20 non-carriers from the oncogenetic clinic, and 36 community controls, participated in a cross-sectional design. Women completed sociodemographic, clinical, general psychological distress, cancer-related worry (CRW), fatigue and sleep questionnaires in their homes, and wore actigraphs for 5-7 nights. Impaired global subjective sleep quality was demonstrated in BRCA1/2 carriers compared to non-carriers and controls [mean Pittsburgh sleep quality index (PSQI) total scores 7.29 +/- 4.34; 3.94 +/- 2.49; 4.21 +/- 2.80, respectively, P = 0.021] and poor sleep quality (PSQI total score >5) was significantly higher in carriers (53%) compared to non-carriers (20%) and controls (28%, P = 0.03). Based on actigraphic measures, sleep latency tended to be longer in carriers compared to counterparts, albeit not significantly. Increased sleep disturbance was related significantly to increased fatigue in the entire sample and in the control group; to psychological distress in the entire sample and in non-carriers; and to CRW in the entire sample. In carriers, sleep disturbance was related strongly but non-significantly to fatigue, psychological distress and CRW. Fatigue and carrier status were significant predictors of sleep quality, accounting for 15.7% of the variance. In conclusion, asymptomatic BRCA1/2 carriers experience poor sleep quality compared to non-carriers and controls. Our study design is unique in that it offers insight regarding the nature of being an asymptomatic carrier, and affords the opportunity to examine factors that may contribute to the development of insomnia in women at risk for breast-ovarian cancer.
  PALB2 physically and functionally connects the proteins encoded by the BRCA1 and BRCA2 breast and ovarian cancer genes into a DNA-damage-response network. However, it remains unclear how these proteins associate with chromatin that contains damaged DNA. We show here that PALB2 binds directly to a conserved chromodomain protein, MRG15, which is a component of histone acetyltransferase-deacetylase complexes. This interaction was identified by analysis of purified MRG15- and PALB2-containing protein complexes. Furthermore, MRG15 interacts with the entire BRCA complex, which contains BRCA1, PALB2, BRCA2 and RAD51. Interestingly, MRG15-deficient cells, similarly to cells deficient in PALB2 or BRCA2, showed reduced efficiency for homology-directed DNA repair and hypersensitivity to DNA interstrand crosslinking agents. Additionally, knockdown of MRG15 diminished the recruitment of PALB2, BRCA2 and RAD51 to sites of DNA damage and reduced chromatin loading of PALB2 and BRCA2. These results suggest that MRG15 mediates DNA-damage-response functions of the BRCA complex in chromatin.
  The incomplete penetrance of mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 suggests that some combination of environmental and genetic factors modifies the risk of breast cancer in mutation carriers. This study sought to identify possible interactions between established breast cancer risk factors and BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations using a case-only study design. Breast cancer cases that had been tested for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations were identified from 11 collaborating centers. Comparisons of reproductive and lifestyle risk factors were made between women with breast cancer who were positive for BRCA1 mutations (n = 283), BRCA2 mutations (n = 204), or negative for both BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations (n = 894). Interaction risk ratios (IRRs) were calculated using multinominal logistic regression models. Compared with non-carriers, statistically significant IRRs were observed for later age at menarche among BRCA2 mutation carriers, for a greater number of pregnancies among both BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers, and for alcohol use among BRCA1 mutation carriers. Our data suggest that the risk for breast cancer among BRCA1 or BRCA2 carriers may be modified by reproductive characteristics and alcohol use. However, our results should be interpreted cautiously given the overall inconsistency in the epidemiologic literature on modifiers of BRCA1 and BRCA2.
  Germline mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are associated with a significantly increased lifetime risk for developing breast and/or ovarian cancer. However, incomplete penetrance and substantial variability in age of disease onset among carriers of the same mutation suggests the involvement of additional modifier genes and/or environmental factors. Somatic inactivating mutations in the p53 gene and genes of the p53 pathway often accompany BRCA1/2-associated tumors. Therefore, we assessed whether these genes are modifiers of penetrance. We genotyped Jewish-Ashkenazi women for functional single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the AKT1 (C>T rs3730358) and the PERP (C>T rs2484067) genes that affect p53-mediated apoptosis, as well as two tag-SNPs in the CHEK2 (C>T rs743184) and the ZBRK1/ZNF350 (G>A rs2278414) genes that encode for proteins involved in growth arrest following DNA damage. The study population included 138 healthy women, 148 breast/ovarian cancer BRCA1/2 mutation carriers, 121 asymptomatic BRCA1/2 mutation carriers, and 210 sporadic noncarrier breast cancer patients. Utilizing lambda(2) and Kaplan-Meier analysis revealed a hazard ratio (HR) of 3.23 (95% CI: 1.44-54, P = 0.0184) for the TT genotype of AKT (rs3730358), HR = 2.105 (95% CI: 1.049-7.434, P = 0.039) for CHEK2 CC genotype (rs743184), and HR = 2.4743 (95% CI: 1.205-11.53, P = 0.022) for the AG genotype of ZBRK1/ZNF350 (rs2278414). No significant association between PERP variants and cancer was identified HR = 0.662 (95% CI: 0.289-1.324, P = 0.261). Our results suggest that genes that act upstream of p53, or participate in the DNA damage response, may modify the risk of cancer in women with mutant BRCA1/2 alleles.
  BACKGROUND: Several authors have proposed the use of patients with double primary malignancies affecting the same or contralateral organ as a genetically enriched resource of cases for epidemiologic case-control studies in cancer. Such an approach is based on the assumption that the factors that increase the risk of a second primary are the same ones which influence the risk of a first primary. The advantages for statistical power are premised on the assumption that relative risks in survivors of a first primary cancer are similar to relative risks in the unaffected population. We explore these assumptions theoretically and empirically using published data from breast cancer studies involving bilateral breast cancer. METHODS: We conducted a literature review to identify case-control studies of variants in 4 genes known to affect breast cancer risk: CHEK2*1100delC; multiple variants in BRCA1 and BRCA2; and FGFR2 rs2981582. Summary odds ratios were obtained for each of 3 study designs: a conventional case-control design, the design comparing bilateral cases with unilateral controls, and the design comparing bilateral cases with population controls. RESULTS: The data show strong patterns of steadily increasing prevalence of risk factors from healthy controls to primary cases to bilateral cases, as expected. Relative risks in survivors of unilateral breast cancer are either the same as in the general population, or modestly attenuated. CONCLUSIONS: Patients with double primary malignancies are a very important underused resource for cancer epidemiologic investigation. Such patients are especially useful for broad genome-wide discovery studies, and for studies of rare, strong risk factors such as high penetrance genes.
  BACKGROUND: Breast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with conventional screening methods improves sensitivity in high-risk patients without benefits on specific survival. We evaluated the characteristics, treatments, and prognostic features of breast cancers diagnosed among BRCA1/2 mutation carriers either inside or outside screening programs that included MRI. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Two groups of patients diagnosed with a new breast cancer between 2001 and 2007 were compared: group 1, patients included in an intensive screening program; and group 2, patients outside of this program. RESULTS: Twenty-one patients met inclusion criteria for group 1, and 102 for group 2. Seventy-four percent and 65%, respectively, were BRCA1 mutation carriers. Tumors in both groups had the same characteristics (pN, grade, estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, HER2 expression), except for smaller tumor size in group 1 (median, 6 mm vs. 22 mm; P < .0001). Group 1 patients had more frequent sentinel node procedures (57% vs. 28%; P = .021) and less commonly received chemotherapy (43% vs. 86%; P < .0001). The 3-year disease-free survival (93% vs. 74%; P = .1) and the 3-year overall survival (100% vs. 92%; P = .2) did not differ between groups. CONCLUSION: MRI might provide improvement in BRCA1/2 carriers in terms of smaller tumor size and treatment morbidity. However, because of aggressive intrinsic characteristics, this does not turn into significant survival benefits.
  The Rad51 protein is essential for DNA repair by homologous recombination. After DNA damage, Rad51 localizes to nuclear foci that represent sites of DNA repair in vivo. In vitro, Rad51 self-assembles on single- or double-stranded DNA to form a nucleoprotein filament. Recently, the merging of innovative single-molecule techniques with ensemble methods has provided unique insights into the dynamic nature of this filament and its cellular function. The assembly and disassembly of Rad51 nucleoprotein filaments is seen to be regulated by recombination accessory proteins. In this regard, the BRC repeats of the BRCA2 protein were shown to modulate the DNA binding selectivity of Rad51. Furthermore, single-molecule studies explained the need for a DNA translocase, Rad54 protein, in the disassembly of Rad51 double-stranded DNA filaments.
  No study has evaluated the performance of BRCA1/2 mutations prediction models in male breast cancer (MBC) series. Although rare, MBC deserves attention because male and female breast cancers share many characteristics, including the involvement of genetic predisposition factors such as BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations. Indeed, the occurrence of MBC is a commonly used criterion to select families for BRCA mutation testing. We evaluated the performance and clinical effectiveness of four different predictive models in a population-based series of 102 Italian MBC patients characterized for BRCA1/2 mutations. Sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive values (PPV, NPV) were calculated for each risk model at the 10% threshold. The area under the ROC (AUC) curves and its corresponding asymptotic 95% CIs were calculated as a measure of the accuracy. In our study, the BRCAPRO version 5.0 had the highest combination of sensitivity, specificity, NPV and PPV for the combined probability and for the discrimination of BRCA2 mutations. In individuals with negative breast-ovarian cancer family history, BRCAPRO 5.0 reached a high discriminatory capacity (AUC=0.92) in predicting BRCA2 mutations and showed values of sensitivity, specificity, NPV and PPV of 0.5, 0.98, 0.97 and 0.67, respectively, for the combined probability. BRCAPRO version 5.0 can be particularly useful in dealing with non-familial MBC, a circumstance that often represents a challenging situation in genetic counseling.
  BACKGROUND: There are relatively few articles addressing long-term follow-up in women with breast cancer at very young ages. METHODS: We have updated and extended our population-based analysis of breast cancer diagnosed at the age < or =30 years in North-west England to include an extra 15 patients with mutation testing in BRCA1, BRCA2 and TP53, with 115 of 288 consecutive cases being tested. Kaplan-Meier curves were generated to assess overall survival, contralateral breast cancer and other second primaries. RESULTS: Survival analysis of all 288 patients showed poor overall survival, although this improved from a 15-year survival of only 46% in those diagnosed between 1980 and 1989 to 58% in those diagnosed between 1990 and 1997 (P=0.05). Contralateral breast cancer rates were at a steady rate of 0.6 per 1000, although the rates in mutation carriers were approximately 2 per 1000. Altogether, 16 BRCA1, 9 BRCA2 and 6 TP53 mutations have now been found among the 115 cases on whom DNA analysis has been performed. BRCAPRO accurately predicted the number of carriers for BRCA1 and BRCA2 and was sensitive and specific at the 10 and 20% threshold, respectively. However, BRCAPRO did not seem to give any weight to DCIS, which accounted for two BRCA1 carriers and three TP53 carriers and overpredicted mutations at the high end of the spectrum, with only 6 of 11 (54%) with a >90% probability having identifiable BRCA1/2 mutations. INTERPRETATION: Rates of new primaries are predicted to some extent by mutation status. BRCAPRO is useful at determining those patients aged < or =30 years to be tested.
  Background: Limited empirical data are available on the effects of genetic counseling and testing among African American women. Objective: To evaluate the effects of genetic counseling and testing in African American women based on different levels of exposure: (a) women who were randomized to culturally tailored (CTGC) and standard genetic counseling (SGC) to women who declined randomization (non-randomized group), (b) participants and non-participants in genetic counseling, and (c) BRCA1 and BRCA2 (BRCA1/2) test result acceptors and decliners. Design: Randomized trial of genetic counseling conducted from February 2003 to November 2006. Measures: We evaluated changes in perceived risk of developing breast cancer and cancer worry. Results: Women randomized to CTGC and SGC did not differ in terms of changes in risk perception and cancer worry compared to decliners. However, counseling participants had a significantly greater likelihood of reporting reductions in perceived risk compared to non-participants (p = 0.03). Test result acceptors also had a significantly greater likelihood of reporting decreases in cancer worry (p = 0.03). However, having a cancer history (p = 0.03) and a BRCA1/2 prior probability (p = 0.04) were associated with increases in cancer worry. Conclusions: Although CTGC did not lead to significant improvements in perceived risk or psychological functioning, African American women may benefit from genetic counseling and testing. Continued efforts should be made to increase access to genetic counseling and testing among African American women at increased risk for hereditary disease. But, follow-up support may be needed for women who have a personal history of cancer and those with a greater prior probability of having a BRCA1/2 mutation.
  The effectiveness of radiotherapy treatment could be significantly improved if tumor cells could be rendered more sensitive to ionizing radiation (IR) without altering the sensitivity of normal tissues. However, many of the key therapeutically exploitable mechanisms that determine intrinsic tumor radiosensitivity are largely unknown. We have conducted a small interfering RNA (siRNA) screen of 200 genes involved in DNA damage repair aimed at identifying genes whose knockdown increased tumor radiosensitivity. Parallel siRNA screens were conducted in irradiated and unirradiated tumor cells (SQ20B) and irradiated normal tissue cells (MRC5). Using gammaH2AX foci at 24 hours after IR, we identified several genes, such as BRCA2, Lig IV, and XRCC5, whose knockdown is known to cause increased cell radiosensitivity, thereby validating the primary screening end point. In addition, we identified POLQ (DNA polymerase ) as a potential tumor-specific target. Subsequent investigations showed that POLQ knockdown resulted in radiosensitization of a panel of tumor cell lines from different primary sites while having little or no effect on normal tissue cell lines. These findings raise the possibility that POLQ inhibition might be used clinically to cause tumor-specific radiosensitization.
  DNA damage repair and checkpoint responses prevent genome instability and provide a barrier to the development of cancer. Inherited mutations in DNA damage response (DDR) genes such as those that encode the homologous recombination (HR) proteins BRCA1 and BRCA2 cause cancer predisposition syndromes. PARP inhibitors are an exciting new class of targeted therapy for treating patients with HR repair-defective tumors. In this study, we use an RNAi screen to identify genes that when silenced cause synthetic lethality with the PARP inhibitor AZD2281. This screen identified the deubiquitylating enzyme USP11 as a participant in HR repair of DNA double-strand breaks. Silencing USP11 with siRNA leads to spontaneous DDR activation in otherwise undamaged cells and hypersensitivity to PARP inhibition, ionizing radiation, and other genotoxic stress agents. Moreover, we demonstrate that HR repair is defective in USP11-silenced cells. Finally, the recruitment of a subset of double-strand break repair proteins including RAD51 and 53BP1 to repair foci is misregulated in the absence of USP11 catalytic activity. Thus, our synthetic lethal approach identified USP11 as a component of the HR double-strand break repair pathway.
  Germline mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 increase the risk for developing breast and ovarian cancer. Previously, the techniques available allowed only for the identification of small genomic alterations, but the dawn of new technology now allows for the rapid detection of large genomic rearrangements (LGRs). LGRs in BRCA1 are responsible for between 0 and 27% of all BRCA1 disease-causing mutations identified in numerous populations. Such alterations are far less common in the BRCA2 gene. To determine the impact of BRCA1 and BRCA2 LGRs in South Africa, 52 hereditary breast and/or ovarian South African families (36 were Afrikaners) were screened for BRCA1 and BRCA2 LGRs using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification. These patients were previously shown to be BRCA1 and BRCA2 small mutation negative. One LGR was detected in BRCA1 in a South African family with Greek ancestry. This is a novel deletion of both exons 23 and 24 (NG_005905.2:g.169527_180579del). This first study of BRCA rearrangements in South Africa reveals that LGRs comprise ~3% of identified BRCA1 mutations, a low rate in comparison to other populations. In addition, we have reviewed all 98 previously characterized BRCA1/2 LGRs and re-named them according to the recommended HGVS nomenclature, using the recently released RefSeqGene records, NG_005905.2 and NG_012772.1 for BRCA1 and BRCA2. A standardized resource is now provided which will assist researchers in determining whether their LGRs are novel. Furthermore, we have clarified some of the previously misunderstood rules of nomenclature, which will make uniform reporting of BRCA1/2 easier in the future.
  We report a novel complex mutation that consists of a deletion of 12 bp and an insertion of 2 bp (c.8402_8413del12ins2bp) in the exon 18 of the BRCA2 gene. This is a frameshift mutation that causes a disruption of the translational reading frame resulting in a stop codon downstream in the 2729 position of the BRCA2 protein. The mutation was present in a Spanish hereditary male/female breast cancer family.
  BACKGROUND: Beclin 1, an important autophagy-related protein in human cells, is involved in cell death and cell survival. Beclin 1 mapped to human chromosome 17q21. It is widely expressed in normal mammary epithelial cells. Although down-regulated expression with mono-allelic deletions of beclin 1 gene was frequently observed in breast tumors, whether there was other regulatory mechanism of beclin 1 was to be investigated. We studied the expression of beclin 1 and explored the possible regulatory mechanisms on its expression in breast tumors. METHODS: 20 pairs of tumors and adjacent normal tissues from patients with sporadic breast invasive ductal cancer (IDCs) were collected. The mRNA expression of beclin 1 was detected by real-time quantitative RT-PCR. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) was determined by real-time quantitative PCR and microsatellite methods. The protein expression of beclin 1, p53, BRCA1 and BRCA2 was assessed by immunohistochemistry. CpG islands in 5' genomic region of beclin 1 gene were identified using MethylPrimer Program. Sodium bisulfite sequencing was used in examining the methylation status of each CpG island. RESULTS: Decreased beclin 1 mRNA expression was detected in 70% of the breast tumors, and the protein levels were co-related to the mRNA levels. Expression of beclin 1 mRNA was demonstrated to be much higher in the BRCA1 positive tumors than that in the BRCA1 negative ones. Loss of heterozygosity was detected in more than 45% of the breast tumors, and a dense cluster of CpG islands was found from the 5' end to the intron 2 of the beclin 1 gene. Methylation analysis showed that the promoter and the intron 2 of beclin 1 were aberrantly methylated in the tumors with decreased expression. CONCLUSIONS: These data indicated that LOH and aberrant DNA methylation might be the possible reasons of the decreased expression of beclin 1 in the breast tumors. The findings here shed some new light on the regulatory mechanisms of beclin 1 in breast cancer.
  With the evolving availability of testing for genetic cancer syndromes, oncologists now are increasingly expected to review family histories and to give a genetic risk assessment as part of their care for breast cancer. The most important of these breast cancer genetic syndromes identified to date have been those associated with the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. Therefore, the proper identification of potentially affected families and providing risk assessment estimates will be ever more essential. This review outlines several different available breast cancer risk assessment models. Risk models for the development of breast cancer as well as risk models that estimate the chance of having a genetic cancer syndrome are discussed. Their clinical applications are also outlined and clinical situations appropriate for each model are reviewed.
  A substantial proportion of Ashkenazi Jewish (AJ) breast and ovarian cancer families carry one of three founder mutations in BRCA1 (185delAG, 5382InsC) and BRCA2 (6174delT). Non-founder mutations are identified in another 2-4% of such families. The extent to which major genomic rearrangements in BRCA contribute to breast and ovarian cancer in the Ashkenazim is not well understood. We identified AJ individuals with breast and/or ovarian cancer undergoing hereditary breast/ovarian cancer risk assessment since 2006 without evidence of a deleterious mutation on BRCA gene sequencing who were screened for major gene rearrangements in BRCA1 and BRCA2. For each proband, the pre-test probability of identifying a deleterious BRCA mutation was estimated using the Myriad II model. We identified 108 affected individuals who underwent large rearrangement testing (80 breast cancer, 19 ovarian cancer, nine both breast and ovarian cancer). The mean estimated AJ specific pre-test probability of a deleterious mutation in BRCA1 and BRCA2 was 24.7% (range: 4.4-88.9%). No genomic rearrangements were identified in either the entire group or in the 26 subjects with pre-test mutation prevalence estimates exceeding 30%. Major gene rearrangements involving the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes appear to contribute little to the burden of inherited predisposition to breast and ovarian cancer in the Ashkenazim.
  BACKGROUND: The purpose of our study was to compare differences in the prognosis of breast cancer (BC) patients at high (H) risk or intermediate slightly (IS) increased risk based on family history and those without a family history of BC, and to evaluate whether ten-year overall survival can be considered a good indicator of BRCA1 gene mutation. METHODS: We classified 5923 breast cancer patients registered between 1988 and 2006 at the Department of Oncology and Haematology in Modena, Italy, into one of three different risk categories according to Modena criteria. One thousand eleven patients at H and IS increased risk were tested for BRCA1/2 mutations. The overall survival (OS) and disease free survival (DFS) were the study end-points. RESULTS: Eighty BRCA1 carriers were identified. A statistically significantly better prognosis was observed for patients belonging to the H risk category with respect to women in the IS and sporadic groups (82% vs.75% vs.73%, respectively; p < 0.0001). Comparing only BRCA1 carriers with BRCA-negative and sporadic BC (77% vs.77% vs.73%, respectively; p < 0.001) an advantage in OS was seen. CONCLUSIONS: Patients belonging to a population with a high probability of being BRCA1 carriers had a better prognosis than those with sporadic BC. Considering these results, women who previously had BC and had survived ten years could be selected for BRCA1 analysis among family members at high risk of hereditary BC during genetic counselling. Since only 30% of patients with a high probability of having hereditary BC have BRCA1 mutations, selecting women with a long term survival among this population could increase the rate of positive analyses, avoiding the use of expensive tests.
  Hereditary breast and ovarian cancer due to mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes is the most common cause of hereditary forms of both breast and ovarian cancer. The overall prevalence of BRCA1/2 mutations is estimated to be from 1 in 400 to 1 in 800 with a higher prevalence in the Ashkenazi Jewish population (1 in 40). Estimates of penetrance (cancer risk) vary considerably depending on the context in which they were derived and have been shown to vary within families with the same BRCA1/2 mutation. This suggests there is no exact risk estimate that can be applied to all individuals with a BRCA1/2 mutation. The likelihood of harboring a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation is dependent on one's personal and/or family history of cancer and can be estimated using various mutation probability models. For those individuals who have a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation, several screening and primary prevention options have been suggested, including prophylactic surgery and chemoprevention. Once a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation has been identified in a family, testing of at-risk relatives can identify those family members who also have the familial mutation and thus need increased surveillance and early intervention when a cancer is diagnosed.
  PURPOSE: Most BRCA1/2 mutations are of unknown clinical relevance. An increasing amount of evidence indicates that there can be deleterious effects through the disruption of the splicing process. We have investigated the effect of aberrant splicing of BRCA1/2 on hereditary breast/ovarian cancer (HBOC). EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: DNA variants were analyzed with splicing prediction programs to select putative splicing mutations. Splicing assays of 57 genetic variants were done by lymphocyte reverse transcription-PCR and/or hybrid minigenes in HeLa and nontumor breast epithelial cells. RESULTS: Twenty-four BRCA1/2 variants of Spanish HBOC patients were bioinformatically preselected. Functional assays showed that 12 variants induced anomalous splicing patterns, 6 of which accounted for 58.5% of BRCA1 families. To further evaluate the defective splicing of BRCA1/2, we analyzed 31 Breast Cancer Information Core Database (BIC) and two artificial variants that were generated by mutagenesis. Sixteen variants induced different degrees of aberrant splicing. Altogether, anomalous splicing was caused by 28 BRCA1/2 variants of all types, indicating that any DNA change can disrupt pre-mRNA processing. We show that a wide range of regulatory elements can be involved, including the canonical and cryptic splice sites, the polypyrimidine tract, and splicing enhancers/silencers. Twenty mutations were predicted to truncate the BRCA proteins and/or to delete essential domains, thus supporting a role in HBOC. CONCLUSIONS: An important fraction of DNA variants of BRCA1/2 presents splicing aberrations that may represent a relevant disease-causing mechanism in HBOC. The identification of splicing disruptions by functional assays is a valuable tool to discriminate between benign polymorphisms and pathogenic mutations.
  PURPOSE: Increased prostate cancer risk has been reported for BRCA mutation carriers, but BRCA-associated clinicopathologic features have not been clearly defined. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We determined BRCA mutation prevalence in 832 Ashkenazi Jewish men diagnosed with localized prostate cancer between 1988 and 2007 and 454 Ashkenazi Jewish controls and compared clinical outcome measures among 26 BRCA mutation carriers and 806 noncarriers. Kruskal-Wallis tests were used to compare age of diagnosis and Gleason score, and logistic regression models were used to determine associations between carrier status, prostate cancer risk, and Gleason score. Hazard ratios (HR) for clinical end points were estimated using Cox proportional hazards models. RESULTS: BRCA2 mutations were associated with a 3-fold risk of prostate cancer [odds ratio, 3.18; 95% confidence interval (95% CI), 1.52-6.66; P = 0.002] and presented with more poorly differentiated (Gleason score > or =7) tumors (85% versus 57%; P = 0.0002) compared with non-BRCA-associated prostate cancer. BRCA1 mutations conferred no increased risk. After 7,254 person-years of follow-up, and adjusting for clinical stage, prostate-specific antigen, Gleason score, and treatment, BRCA2 and BRCA1 mutation carriers had a higher risk of recurrence [HR (95% CI), 2.41 (1.23-4.75) and 4.32 (1.31-13.62), respectively] and prostate cancer-specific death [HR (95% CI), 5.48 (2.03-14.79) and 5.16 (1.09-24.53), respectively] than noncarriers. CONCLUSIONS: BRCA2 mutation carriers had an increased risk of prostate cancer and a higher histologic grade, and BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations were associated with a more aggressive clinical course. These results may have implications for tailoring clinical management of this subset of hereditary prostate cancer.
  PALB2 is a recently discovered breast cancer susceptibility gene, and mutations in the gene have been demonstrated to confer about twofold higher risk of breast cancer. Truncating mutations in PALB2 gene have been identified in varied populations. However, PALB2's significance to breast cancer has not been investigated in the Korean population. In this study, we evaluated the frequency of PALB2 1592delT and 229delT mutations in 300 Korean breast cancer patients diagnosed with either familial or early-onset breast cancer. All patients were confirmed negative for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations. Neither 1592delT nor 229delT mutations was found in any of the study cohort. Our results imply that these mutations are absent or rare in Korean patients who are negative for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations. We found no evidence to recommend screening for these mutations in the Korean population. However, PALB2 mutations have been demonstrated infrequent and inhomogeneous across investigated populations. Thus, screening the whole PALB2 gene for novel mutations is required to elucidate its significance in predisposition to breast cancer in Korean women.
  It is now understood that epigenetic alterations occur frequently in sporadic breast carcinogenesis, but little is known about the epigenetic alterations associated with familial breast tumors. We performed genome-wide DNA-methylation profiling on familial breast cancers (n = 33) to identify patterns of methylation specific to the different mutation groups (BRCA1, BRCA2, and BRCAx) or intrinsic subtypes of breast cancer (basal, luminal A, luminal B, HER2-amplified, and normal-like). We used methylated DNA immunoprecipitation (MeDIP) on Affymetrix promoter chips to interrogate methylation profiles across 25,500 distinct transcripts. Using a support vector machine classification algorithm, we demonstrated that genome-wide methylation profiles predicted tumor mutation status with estimated error rates of 19% (BRCA1), 31% (BRCA2), and 36% (BRCAx) but did not accurately predict the intrinsic subtypes defined by gene expression. Furthermore, using unsupervised hierarchical clustering, we identified a distinct subgroup of BRCAx tumors defined by methylation profiles. We validated these findings in the 33 tumors in the test set, as well as in an independent validation set of 47 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded familial breast tumors, by pyrosequencing and Epityper. Finally, gene-expression profiling and SNP CGH array previously performed on the same samples allowed full integration of methylation, gene-expression, and copy-number data sets, revealing frequent hypermethylation of genes that also displayed loss of heterozygosity, as well as of genes that show copy-number gains, providing a potential mechanism for expression dosage compensation. Together, these data show that methylation profiles for familial breast cancers are defined by the mutation status and are distinct from the intrinsic subtypes.
  PURPOSE: Several in vitro studies suggest that BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers present increased sensitivity to ionizing radiation. Different assays for the assessment of deoxyribonucleic acid double-strand break repair capacity have been used, but results are rather inconsistent. Given the concerns about the possible risks of breast screening with mammography in mutation carrier women and the potentially damaging effects of radiotherapy, the purpose of this study was to further investigate the radiosensitivity of this population. METHODS AND MATERIALS: The G2 chromosomal radiosensitivity assay was used to assess chromosomal breaks in lymphocyte cultures after exposure to 1 Gy. A group of familiar breast cancer patients carrying a mutation in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene (n = 15) and a group of healthy mutation carriers (n = 5) were investigated and compared with a reference group of healthy women carrying no mutation (n = 21). RESULTS: BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers had a significantly higher number of mean chromatid breaks per cell (p = 0.006) and a higher maximum number of breaks (p = 0.0001) as compared with their matched controls. Both healthy carriers and carriers with a cancer history were more radiosensitive than controls (p = 0.002 and p = 0.025, respectively). Age was not associated with increased radiosensitivity (p = 0.868). CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers show enhanced radiosensitivity, presumably because of the involvement of the BRCA genes in deoxyribonucleic acid repair and cell cycle control mechanisms.
  This randomised controlled trial evaluated the impact of an enhanced counselling (EC) intervention on knowledge about the heritability of breast and ovarian cancer and distress, as a function of BRCA test result, among high-risk women. Before deciding about whether or not to undergo genetic testing, participants were randomly assigned to the EC intervention (N = 69), designed to promote cognitive and affective processing of cancer risk information (following the standard individualised counselling session), or to the control condition (N = 65), which involved standard individualised counselling followed by a general health information session to control for time and attention. Women in the EC group exhibited greater knowledge than women in the control group, 1 week after the intervention. Further, at the affective level, the intervention was found to be the most beneficial for women testing positive: specifically 1 week after test result disclosure, women in the intervention group who tested positive experienced lower levels of distress than women in the control group who tested positive. The findings suggest that the design of counselling aids should include a component that explicitly activates the individual's cognitive-affective processing system.
  Accurate estimations of lifetime risks of breast and ovarian cancer are crucial for counselling women from BRCA1/2 families. We therefore determined breast and ovarian cancer penetrance in BRCA1/2 mutation families in the northern Netherlands and compared them with the incidence of cancers in the general population in this region. We identified 1188 female mutation carriers and first-degree female relatives in 185 families with a pathogenic BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation. The occurrence of breast cancer, contralateral breast cancer and ovarian cancer was recorded. The cumulative incidence of breast cancer by age 70 was 71.4% (95% CI 67.2-82.4%) in BRCA1 and 87.5% (82.4-92.6%) in BRCA2 mutation carriers. For ovarian cancer at age 70, it was 58.9% (53.5-64.3%) in BRCA1 and 34.5% (25.0-44.0%) in BRCA2 mutation carriers. For breast cancer we saw a rise of 24.2% in the cumulative incidence in the seventh decade for BRCA2 mutation carriers versus 6.3% for BRCA1. For ovarian cancer the rise in the seventh decade was 17.3% for BRCA1 mutation carriers and 15.1% for BRCA2. The 10-year risk for contralateral breast cancer was 34.2% (29.4-39.0%) in BRCA1 families and 29.2% (22.9-35.5%) in BRCA2. We show that the incidence of breast and ovarian cancer in BRCA2 mutation carriers and of ovarian cancer in BRCA1 mutation carriers is still high after 60 years. This may justify intensive breast screening as well as oophorectomy even after age 60. The risk of contralateral breast cancer rises approximately 3% per year, which may affect preventive choices.
  BACKGROUND: BRCA2 gene expression is tightly regulated during the cell cycle in human breast cells. The expression of BRCA2 gene is silenced at the G0/G1 phase of cell growth and is de-silenced at the S/G2 phase. While studying the activity of BRCA2 gene promoter in breast cancer cells, we discovered that this promoter has bi-directional activity and the product of the reverse activity (a ZAR1-like protein, we named ZAR2) silences the forward promoter at the G0/G1 phase of the cell. Standard techniques like cell synchronization by serum starvation, flow cytometry, N-terminal or C-terminal FLAG epitope-tagged protein expression, immunofluorescence confocal microscopy, dual luciferase assay for promoter evaluation, and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay were employed during this study. RESULTS: Human BRCA2 gene promoter is active in both the forward and the reverse orientations. This promoter is 8-20 fold more active in the reverse orientation than in the forward orientation when the cells are in the non-dividing stage (G0/G1). When the cells are in the dividing state (S/G2), the forward activity of the promoter is 5-8 folds higher than the reverse activity. The reverse activity transcribes the ZAR2 mRNA with 966 nt coding sequence which codes for a 321 amino acid protein. ZAR2 has two C4 type zinc fingers at the carboxyl terminus. In the G0/G1 growth phase ZAR2 is predominantly located inside the nucleus of the breast cells, binds to the BRCA2 promoter and inhibits the expression of BRCA2. In the dividing cells, ZAR2 is trapped in the cytoplasm. CONCLUSIONS: BRCA2 gene promoter has bi-directional activity, expressing BRCA2 and a novel C4-type zinc finger containing transcription factor ZAR2. Subcellular location of ZAR2 and its expression from the reverse promoter of the BRCA2 gene are stringently regulated in a cell cycle dependent manner. ZAR2 binds to BRCA2/ZAR2 bi-directional promoter in vivo and is responsible, at least in part, for the silencing of BRCA2 gene expression in the G0/G1 phase in human breast cells.
  Recent preclinical data have demonstrated that pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDA) cells with defects in the Fanconi anemia/BRCA2 pathway are hypersensitive to interstrand crosslinking agents. The challenge is to efficiently identify patients who will benefit from these therapies. Patients were chosen for this study by evaluating personal history, ethnic background and family history of pancreatic malignancy. Molecular assays were performed on tissue samples. Patient A developed PDA in the context of a known BRCA2 frameshift mutation (2157delG), suspected because of her personal and multigenerational family history of breast cancer. She was treated with surgical resection, and targeted chemotherapy. Patient A continues to be disease free 32 months after her diagnosis and treatment. Patient B developed PDA in the context of a strong family history of PDA and Ashkenazi Jewish heritage. Genetic analysis on critical DNA repair genes revealed no alterations. This patient did not receive a tailored treatment regimen. This study highlights the challenge of treating PDA patients and selecting those eligible for targeted therapy. The current targeted treatment options for PDA are reviewed. A new multidisciplinary approach for stratifying PDA patients for promising targeted adjuvant therapy and familial risk counseling is proposed.
  BACKGROUND: Responses following BRCA1/2 genetic testing are relevant for the comprehension of risk status and may play a role in risk management decision making. The objective of this study was to evaluate a psychosocial telephone counseling (PTC) intervention delivered to BRCA1/2 mutation carriers following standard genetic counseling (SGC). We examined the effect of the intervention on distress and the concerns related to genetic testing. METHODS: This prospective randomized clinical trial included 90 BRCA1/2 mutation carriers. We measured anxiety, depression, and genetic testing distress outcomes at intervention baseline and 6 and 12 months following disclosure. We evaluated the effects of SGC versus SGC plus PTC on psychological outcomes using intention-to-treat analyses through generalized estimating equations. RESULTS: At 6 months, PTC reduced depressive symptoms (Z = -2.25, P = 0.02) and genetic testing distress (Z = 2.18, P = 0.02) compared with SGC. Furthermore, women in the intervention condition reported less clinically significant anxiety at 6 months (chi(2)(1) = 4.11, P = 0.04) than women who received SGC. We found no differences in outcomes between the intervention groups at the 12-month follow-up. CONCLUSIONS: As an adjunct to SGC, PTC delivered following disclosure of positive BRCA1/2 test results seems to offer modest short-term benefits for distress and anxiety. These results build upon a growing literature of psychosocial interventions for BRCA1/2 carriers and, given the potential impact of affect on risk management decision making, suggest that some carriers may derive benefits from adjuncts to traditional genetic counseling.
  Previous small scale studies reported that deleterious BRCA2 and CDKN2a germline mutations contribute to a subset of families with inherited pancreatic cancer. As the prevalence of those mutations in the setting of familial pancreatic cancer is still not well defined for the German population, we evaluated the presence of BRCA2 and CDKN2a germline mutations in a large cohort of familial pancreatic cancer (FPC) families from the German National Case Collection for Familial Pancreatic Cancer (FaPaCa). Fifty-six FPC families with at least two-first-degree relatives with confirmed pancreatic cancer that did not fulfill the criteria of other tumor predisposition syndromes, were analyzed for BRCA2 and CDKN2a germline mutations by DHPLC and/or direct sequencing. No deleterious CDKN2a mutations were identified in our families suggesting that CDKN2a mutations are unlikely to predispose PC in FPC families without melanoma. No deleterious BRCA2 mutations, but 6 unclassified variants, were detected in our FPC collection. Combining the prevalence of deleterious BRCA2 germline mutations from our previous separate study with the data from this study we were able to much more accurately estimate the BRCA2 carrier frequency for FPC families in the German population. A total of two mutations and 6 unclassified variants (mutation range: 2.8-11.4%) were thus identified in 70 German FPC families, indicating that the prevalence of BRCA2 mutations in the German FPC population is less frequent than previously reported.
  Male breast cancer accounts for around 1% of all breast cancer cases, but the incidence has increased over the past 25 years. The rarity of this entity precludes prospective randomized clinical trials. Although breast carcinoma in both genders share certain characteristics, notable differences have emerged. Familial cases usually have BRCA2 rather than BRCA1 mutations. Klinefelter syndrome is the strongest risk factor for developing male breast carcinoma. Men tend to be diagnosed at an older age than women. Presentation is usually a painless lump, but is often late, with more than 40% of individuals having stage III or IV disease. When survival is adjusted for age at diagnosis and stage of disease, outcomes for male and female patients with breast cancer is similar. Surgery is usually mastectomy with axillary clearance or sentinel node biopsy. Because 90% of tumors are hormonal receptor positive, tamoxifen is standard adjuvant therapy. Indications for radiotherapy and chemotherapy are similar to female breast cancer. For metastatic disease, hormonal therapy is the main treatment, but chemotherapy can also provide palliation.

  BACKGROUND: Mutations in the BRCA genes confer greater risk of developing breast, ovarian, and prostate cancer. Families carrying the mutation can have intensive surveillance and take preventative measures. This is the first report on the uptake of such interventions in Chinese mutation carriers residing in Asia. METHODS: Breast and ovarian cancer index patients and family members referred for genetic counselling and testing who are found to carry the BRCA mutations were included in this multicenter study. RESULTS: A total of 31 patients with breast and/or ovarian cancer were found to carry BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. Forty-one tested family members also carried the mutations. Of the females, 85.7% of the index patients opted for breast surveillance and 23.8% for prophylactic mastectomy. Of the family members, 82.4% chose breast surveillance and 17.7% had prophylactic mastectomy. The majority of index patients and family members preferred ovarian surveillance (84 and 82.4%). Amongst the index patients, 32% decided for prophylactic salpingo-oophorectomy; 17.6% of the family members who did not have history of ovarian cancer decided to have prophylactic salpingo-oophorectomy. All male index patients agreed to breast and prostate surveillance, including breast clinical examination and PSA monitoring. For those male family members found to be BRCA mutation carriers, 56.3% agreed to have breast surveillance and 66.7% agreed to have prostate surveillance. No index patient or family member agreed to any form of chemoprevention. CONCLUSIONS: Chinese BRCA mutation carriers have a higher uptake of cancer surveillance than prophylactic surgery and have a lack of interest in the use of chemoprevention drugs.
  OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to characterize the population referred to the Maritime Medical Genetics Service (MMGS) because of increased risk of breast and/or ovarian cancer, and to evaluate the MMGS referral criteria for this population. METHODS: We reviewed a retrospective cohort of patients at increased risk of breast and/or ovarian cancer (n = 574) with appointments between January 2001 and May 2007 at the MMGS. Data analysis was performed using descriptive statistics in Filemaker Pro 8.5v1 and Microsoft Excel. RESULTS: Among 574 patients, 253 (44%) had test results available at the time of data collection, and 65 (25.7%) had BRCA mutations (44 BRCA1 and 21 BRCA2). Positive test results for each referral criterion ranged from 0% to 100%. CONCLUSION: Use of referral criteria at the MMGS yielded higher rates of positive test results than previously thought. It may be beneficial to expand testing criteria to ensure that everyone who may carry a mutation is offered testing.
  Penetrances of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations have been derived from retrospective studies, implying the possibility of ascertainment biases to influence the results.We have followed women at risk for breast and/or ovarian cancer for two decades, and report the prospectively observed age-related annual incidence rates to contract breast or ovarian cancer for women with deleterious BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations based on 4830 observation years. Patients were grouped according to mutation, age and having/not having had previous cancer.In women not having had previous cancer and aged 40-59 years, the annual incidence rate to contract breast or ovarian cancer in those having the most frequent BRCA1 founder mutations was 4.0%, for women in this age group and with less frequent BRCA1 mutations annual incidence rate was 5.9%, and for women with BRCA2 mutations 3.5%.The observed figures may be used for genetic counseling of healthy mutation carriers in the respective age groups. The results may indicate that less frequent BRCA1 mutations have higher penetrances than BRCA1 founder mutations.
  BACKGROUND: Women from families with a high risk of breast or ovarian cancer in which genetic testing for mutations in the BRCA1/2 genes is inconclusive are a vulnerable and understudied group. Furthermore, there are no studies of the professional specialists who treat them - geneticists, genetic counsellors/nurses, oncologists, gynaecologists and breast surgeons. METHODS: We conducted a small qualitative study that investigated women who had developed breast cancer under the age of 45 and who had an inconclusive BRCA1/2 genetic diagnostic test (where no mutations or unclassified variants were identified). We arranged three focus groups for affected women and their close female relatives - 13 women took part. We also interviewed 12 health professionals who were involved in the care of these women. RESULTS: The majority of the women had a good grasp of the meaning of their own or a family member's inconclusive result, but a few indicated some misunderstanding. Most of the women in this study underwent the test for the benefit of others in the family and none mentioned that they were having the test purely for themselves. A difficult issue for sisters of affected women was whether or not to undertake prophylactic breast surgery. The professionals were sensitive to the difficulties in explaining an inconclusive result. Some felt frustrated that technology had not as yet provided them with a better tool for prediction of risk. CONCLUSIONS: Some of the women were left with the dilemma of what decision to make regarding medical management of their cancer risk. For the most part, the professionals believed that the women should be supported in whatever management decisions they considered best, provided these decisions were based on a complete and accurate understanding of the genetic test that had taken place in the family.
  Risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy (RRSO) is widely used for cancer risk reduction in BRCA1 or BRCA2 (BRCA1/2) mutation carriers. Occult ovarian/fallopian tube cancers (OOC) detected at the time of RRSO have been reported in several studies with wide variability in reported prevalence. We estimated the prevalence of OOC in a prospective cohort of 647 BRCA1/2 mutation carriers from 18 centers (PROSE consortium) who underwent RRSO between 2001 and 2008. OOC was detected in 16 of 647 women (2.5%). The mean age at RRSO was 51.7 in those with OOC versus 46.6 in those without OOC (P = 0.017). Twelve of the 16 OOCs (75%) were diagnosed in women with BRCA1 mutations. Thirty-eight percent of women with OOC had stage 1 cancer versus none of the women in the PROSE database diagnosed with ovarian cancer outside of screening. Among 385 women (60%) in whom pathology reports were available for central review, 246 (64%) RRSOs were performed at participating PROSE centers while 139 (36%) were performed at local sites. Ovarian and fallopian tube tissues removed at major genetics referral centers were significantly more likely to have been examined in toto compared to specimens obtained at non-referral centers (75% vs. 30%, P < 0.001). Our results confirm that OOC may be found at the time of RRSO in BRCA1/2 mutation carriers and suggest that OOC are of a more favorable stage than cancers found outside RRSO. An unacceptably high proportion of pathologic examinations did not adequately examine ovaries and fallopian tubes obtained at RRSO.
  Mitotic homologous recombination promotes genome stability through the precise repair of DNA double-strand breaks and other lesions that are encountered during normal cellular metabolism and from exogenous insults. As a result, homologous recombination repair is essential during proliferative stages in development and during somatic cell renewal in adults to protect against cell death and mutagenic outcomes from DNA damage. Mutations in mammalian genes encoding homologous recombination proteins, including BRCA1, BRCA2 and PALB2, are associated with developmental abnormalities and tumorigenesis. Recent advances have provided a clearer understanding of the connections between these proteins and of the key steps of homologous recombination and DNA strand exchange.
  A large number of rare sequence variants of unknown clinical significance have been identified in the breast cancer susceptibility genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2. Laboratory-based methods that can distinguish between carriers of pathogenic mutations and non-carriers are likely to have utility for the classification of these sequence variants. To identify predictors of pathogenic mutation status in familial breast cancer patients, we explored the use of gene expression arrays to assess the effect of two DNA-damaging agents (irradiation and mitomycin C) on cellular response in relation to BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation status. A range of regimes was used to treat 27 lymphoblastoid cell-lines (LCLs) derived from affected women in high-risk breast cancer families (nine BRCA1, nine BRCA2, and nine non-BRCA1/2 or BRCAX individuals) and nine LCLs from healthy individuals. Using an RNA-pooling strategy, we found that treating LCLs with 1.2 microM mitomycin C and measuring the gene expression profiles 1 hour post-treatment had the greatest potential to discriminate BRCA1, BRCA2, and BRCAX mutation status. A classifier was built using the expression profile of nine QRT-PCR validated genes that were associated with BRCA1, BRCA2, and BRCAX status in RNA pools. These nine genes could distinguish BRCA1 from BRCA2 carriers with 83% accuracy in individual samples, but three-way analysis for BRCA1, BRCA2, and BRCAX had a maximum of 59% prediction accuracy. Our results suggest that, compared to BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers, non-BRCA1/2 (BRCAX) individuals are genetically heterogeneous. This study also demonstrates the effectiveness of RNA pools to compare the expression profiles of cell-lines from BRCA1, BRCA2, and BRCAX cases after treatment with irradiation and mitomycin C as a method to prioritize treatment regimes for detailed downstream expression analysis.
  BACKGROUND: Indirect alternatives to sequencing as a method for mutation scanning are of interest to diagnostic laboratories because they have the potential for considerable savings in both time and costs. Ideally, such methods should be simple, rapid, and highly sensitive, and they should be validated formally to a very high standard. Currently, most reported methods lack one or more of these characteristics. We describe the optimization and validation of conformation-sensitive capillary electrophoresis (CSCE) for diagnostic mutation scanning. METHODS: We initially optimized the performance of CSCE with a systematic panel of plasmid-based controls. We then compared manual analysis by visual inspection with automated analysis by BioNumerics software (Applied Maths) in a blinded interlaboratory validation with 402 BRCA1 (breast cancer 1, early onset) and BRCA2 (breast cancer 1, early onset) variants previously characterized by Sanger sequencing. RESULTS: With automated analysis, we demonstrated a sensitivity of >99% (95% CI), which is indistinguishable from the sensitivity for conventional sequencing by capillary electrophoresis. The 95% CI for specificity was 90%-93%; thus, CSCE greatly reduces the number of fragments that need to be sequenced to fully characterize variants. By manual analysis, the 95% CIs for sensitivity and specificity were 98.3%-99.4% and 93.1%-95.5%, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: CSCE is amenable to a high degree of automation, and analyses can be multiplexed to increase both capacity and throughput. We conclude that once it is optimized, CSCE combined with analysis with BioNumerics software is a highly sensitive and cost-effective mutation-scanning technique suitable for routine genetic diagnostic analysis of heterozygous nucleotide substitutions, small insertions, and deletions.
  Germline mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are characterized by deficient repair of DNA double-strand breaks by homologous recombination. Defective DNA double-strand break repair has been not only implicated as a key contributor to tumorigenesis in mutation carriers but also represents a potential target for therapy. The transcriptional similarities between BRCA1-deficient tumors and sporadic tumors of the basal-like subtype have led to the investigation of homologous recombination repair-directed therapy in triple-negative tumors, which demonstrates overlap with the basal-like subtype. We broaden the scope of this topic by addressing a "repair-defective" rather than "BRCA1-like" phenotype. We discuss structural and functional aspects of key repair proteins including BRCA1, BRCA2, BRCA1 interacting protein C-terminal helicase 1, and partner and localizer of BRCA2 and describe the phenotypic consequences of their loss at the cellular, tissue, and organism level. We review potential mechanisms of repair pathway dysfunction in sporadic tumors and address how the identification of such defects may guide the application of repair-directed therapies.
  BRCA1/2 predictive testing and gender: Uptake, motivation and psychological characteristics: Data on male uptake of BRCA1/2 predictive testing and psychological characteristics of males in comparison to females are scarce. We investigated gender differences in the cohort tested at the Center for Human Genetics in Leuven during a 10-year period (1998-2007). Males were significantly older than females. Breast cancer related distress (IES) was significantly lower in men and was not associated with BRCA1 or BRCA2. The groups of both males and females were psychologically stronger than average (SCL-90, UCL) and self-selected. Men were unanimously motivated (personal relevance of 12 motives rated on a Likert scale) by concern for their daughters, and significantly more so than women. One third of them (versus 12% women) referred to child-bearing decisions. Considering all unaffected siblings in the family of origin, uptake of predictive testing was significantly higher in females. Moreover, uptake was significantly higher in women belonging to a BRCA2 than to a BRCA1 family. In the descendants of identified carriers, uptake was predicted by gender and age, but not by the parent's gender or by BRCA1 or BRCA2 status.
  Checkpoint kinase 1 (Chk1) regulates cell cycle checkpoints and DNA damage repair in response to genotoxic stress. Inhibition of Chk1 is an emerging strategy for potentiating the cytotoxicity of chemotherapeutic drugs. Here, we demonstrate that AZD7762, an ATP -competitive Chk1/2 inhibitor induces gammaH2AX in gemcitabine-treated cells by altering both dynamics and stability of replication forks, allowing the firing of suppressed replication origins as measured by DNA fiber combing and causing a dramatic increase in DNA breaks as measured by comet assay. Furthermore, we identify ATM and DNA-PK, rather than ATR, as the kinases mediating gammaH2AX induction, suggesting AZD7762 converts stalled forks into double strand breaks (DSBs). Consistent with DSB formation upon fork collapse, cells deficient in DSB repair by lack of BRCA2, XRCC3 or DNA-PK were selectively more sensitive to combined AZD7762 and gemcitabine. Checkpoint abrogation by AZD7762 also caused premature mitosis in gemcitabine-treated cells arrested in G(1)/early S-phase. Prevention of premature mitotic entry via Cdk1 siRNA knockdown suppressed apoptosis. These results demonstrate that chemosensitization of gemcitabine by Chk1 inhibition results from at least three cellular events, namely, activation of origin firing, destabilization of stalled replication forks and entry of cells with damaged DNA into lethal mitosis. Additionally, the current study indicates that the combination of Chk1 inhibitor and gemcitabine may be particularly effective in targeting tumors with specific DNA repair defects.
  High risk may be defined as either an absolute risk greater than 20 % or a relative risk greater than 4. Concerning breast and ovarian cancer, high risk patients include carriers of a constitutive deleterious mutation of BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes, patients with a significant family history of breast or ovarian cancer, and patients who have been diagnosed a benign breast lesion with a high risk of degeneration, i.e. atypical hyperplasia. Following up such patients relies on specific strategies. A center including a large panel of physicians involved in the various modalities for patients' management (geneticians, radiologists, gynecologists, plastic surgeons, pathologists, endocrinologists, psychologists, medical oncologists) has been created at Tenon Hospital with this purpose. The collaboration of these different specialists with the referent physician of the patient allows for the definition and the implementation of a patient-centered follow-up continuously updated to take into account the different periods of a woman's life, according to best practices recommendations and the evolving state-of-the art.
  AIM: In a previous cohort study, we showed that there was a significant variation in the frequency of ovarian cancer after having breast cancer in Sweden, with the highest risk occuring in the Western region. The present study aimed to evaluate whether the high prevalence of the founder mutation BRCA1 3171ins5 may explain the excess number of ovarian cancer. METHOD: Among more than 26 000 women with breast cancer in the Western Swedish Health Care Region, 159 cases were subsequently diagnosed with ovarian cancer, whereas the expected number was 96. Archived tissue material was analysed for six common Scandinavian BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutations. RESULTS: The excess number of cases was 63 (95% CI 47-77), based on person-years at risk and national incidence rates of ovarian cancer. A BRCA1 gene mutation was detected in 33 cases corresponding to 52% of the excess number. The founder mutation, BRCA1 3171ins5, was detected in 44% of the excess number. The identified mutations decreased from 45% in women less than 50 years of age at follow-up to 14% at 60+ years at follow-up. There was no obvious decrease in mutation frequency by excess numbers with age. Age at follow-up and first-degree relatives with breast and/or ovarian cancer were the best predictors of a mutation in this material. CONCLUSION: The founder mutation, BRCA1 3171ins5, explains the excess of ovarian cancer after breast cancer in the region. From the relative frequency of the studied mutations found at the cancer genetic counselling clinic, it is estimated that BRCA1 gene mutations are associated with about 80-85% of the excess cases. This means that a negative screening for these mutations in similar cases may have a predictive value and could strongly reduce the risk of ovarian cancer in relatives.
  We report a novel germline 490delCT mutation in BRCA2 gene, detected in a 38-year-old woman with breast cancer. The mutation originates a premature stop at codon 99, leading to a truncated protein, and has not been documented in any published report to the best of our knowledge.
  BACKGROUND: Latinas are less likely to use genetic services (counseling and testing) for hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer risk compared to other ethnic groups. Meanwhile, little is known about barriers to genetic counseling among Latinas at increased risk of inherited breast cancer. METHODS: A two-phase pilot study was conducted to examine interest, barriers and beliefs about BRCA genetic counseling among at-risk Latinas in New York City and explore the potential for developing a culturally-tailored narrative educational tool for use in future studies. Phase 1 included quantitative telephone interviews (N = 15) with bilingual participants with a personal diagnosis at a young age and/or family history of breast and/or ovarian cancer. Quantitative results informed development of a narrative prototype educational presentation viewed by a subset of participants (N = 10) in Phase 2 focus groups. RESULTS: Despite barriers, including lack of awareness/knowledge, concerns related to learning cancer risks of family members, and concerns about cost/health insurance, participants reported positive attitudes, beliefs and interest in learning about BRCA genetic counseling. Further, significant increases in knowledge were demonstrated from pre-post presentation (p = 0.04). CONCLUSION: There is an unmet need to educate at-risk Latinas about BRCA genetic counseling. Culturally-tailored educational materials including narratives may increase knowledge about BRCA genetic counseling among this underserved group. The effectiveness of these approaches should be tested in future research with larger samples.
  AIM: Women at high risk for hereditary breast/ovarian cancer require specific management strategies for cancer prevention and early detection. The authors sought to determine the prevalence of family histories suggestive of a hereditary breast/ovarian cancer syndrome in patients with a personal history of breast or ovarian cancer in Japanese women. METHODS: Family history (first- and second-degree relatives) data were collected by a self-administered questionnaire for women with a history of breast or ovarian cancer in six major cancer treating hospitals in Niigata prefecture, Japan. RESULTS: Data were obtained from 1463 women: 626 women with a history of breast cancer, 289 women with a history of ovarian cancer and 548 women without a history of any cancer as controls. Women with a family history of breast and/or ovarian cancer had OR of breast cancer of 2.3 (95% confidential interval [CI] 1.5-3.7) and ovarian cancer of 2.2 (95% CI 1.3-3.8). The risk was higher when the proband was younger or when two or more relatives were affected. Among women with a history of breast or ovarian cancer, 7.5% met the criteria for a 10% risk of a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation according to the Myriad model. CONCLUSION: Obtaining a detailed breast and ovarian cancer family history and the application of the Myriad model is useful for identifying women at an elevated genetic risk of breast and ovarian cancer. The estimation for the prevalence of hereditary breast/ovarian cancer syndrome has significant implications for a patient's management, as well as for the capacity for risk assessment and testing.
  INTRODUCTION: The risk of breast cancer to first degree relatives of breast cancer patients is approximately twice that of the general population. Breast cancer, however, is a heterogeneous disease and it is plausible that the familial relative risk (FRR) for breast cancer may differ by the pathological subtype of the tumour. The contribution of genetic variants associated with breast cancer susceptibility to the subtype-specific FRR is still unclear. METHODS: We computed breast cancer FRR for subtypes of breast cancer by comparing breast cancer incidence in relatives of breast cancer cases from a population-based series with known estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) or human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) status with that expected from the general population. We estimated the contribution to the FRR of genetic variants associated with breast cancer susceptibility using subtype-specific genotypic relative risks and allele frequencies for each variant. RESULTS: At least one marker was measured for 4,590 breast cancer cases, who reported 9,014 affected and unaffected first-degree female relatives. There was no difference between the breast cancer FRR for relatives of patients with ER-negative (FRR = 1.78, 95% confidence intervals (CI): 1.44 to 2.11) and ER-positive disease (1.82, 95% CI: 1.67 to 1.98), P = 0.99. There was some suggestion that the breast cancer FRR for relatives of patients with ER-negative disease was higher than that for ER-positive disease for ages of the relative less than 50 years old (FRR = 2.96, 95% CI: 2.04 to 3.87; and 2.05, 95% CI: 1.70 to 2.40 respectively; P = 0.07), and that the breast cancer FRR for relatives of patients with ER-positive disease was higher than for ER-negative disease when the age of the relative was greater than 50 years (FRR = 1.76, 95% CI: 1.59 to 1.93; and 1.41, 95% CI: 1.08 to 1.74 respectively, P = 0.06). We estimated that mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 explain 32% of breast cancer FRR for relatives of patients with ER-negative and 9.4% of the breast cancer FRR for relatives of patients with ER-positive disease. Twelve recently identified common breast cancer susceptibility variants were estimated to explain 1.9% and 9.6% of the FRR to relatives of patients with ER-negative and ER-positive disease respectively. CONCLUSIONS: FRR for breast cancer was significantly increased for both ER-negative and ER-positive disease. Including receptor status in conjunction with genetic status may aid risk prediction in women with a family history.
  BRCA1/2 mutations are the most commonly identified germ line gene mutations in patients with hereditary breast cancer. These proteins have many critical cellular functions, including repair of DNA double-strand breaks. The role of defective BRCA1/2 as a predictor of response to DNA-damaging agents has been studied extensively in preclinical models, but prospective clinical validation is lacking. Poly [ADP-ribose] polymerase (PARP) inhibitors illustrate the concept of synthetic lethality in cells with defective BRCA1/2 and numerous PARP inhibitors are being evaluated in patients with BRCA1/2-associated tumors. BRCA1/2 mutation or functional loss will likely serve as a useful predictive biomarker of response to treatment with PARP inhibitors.
  Significant advances have been made in the diagnosis and treatment of female breast cancer, resulting in a decline in incidence and a global improvement in clinical outcome. The statistics for male breast cancer (MBC) stand in sharp contrast-over the past several decades, there has been a steady rise in the incidence of this disease, and clinical outcome has improved at a much slower pace. In the current review, the clinicopathologic features of MBC are described in detail. An emphasis is placed on molecular profiling of MBC, which may identify candidate biomarkers and putative targets for pharmacologic intervention. The current role of cytotoxic chemotherapy and endocrine therapy (including tamoxifen, aromatase inhibitors and GnRH analogues) is defined in the context of currently available studies. Furthermore, the potential role of targeted agents, including HER2-directed therapies, PARP inhibitors, and angiogenesis inhibitors, is delineated.
  Large genomic rearrangements (LGR) represent substantial proportion of pathogenic mutations in the BRCA1 gene, whereas the frequency of rearrangements in the BRCA2 gene is low in many populations. We screened for LGRs in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) in 521 unrelated patients negative for BRCA1/2 point mutations selected from 655 Czech high-risk breast and/or ovarian cancer patients. Besides long range PCR, a chromosome 17-specific oligonucleotide-based array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) was used for accurate location of deletions. We identified 14 patients carrying 8 different LGRs in BRCA1 that accounted for 12.3% of all pathogenic BRCA1 mutations. No LGRs were detected in the BRCA2 gene. In a subgroup of 239 patients from high-risk families, we found 12 LGRs (5.0%), whereas two LGRs were revealed in a subgroup of 282 non-familial cancer cases (0.7%). Five LGRs (deletion of exons 1-17, 5-10, 13-19, 18-22 and 21-24) were novel; two LGRs (deletion of exons 5-14 and 21-22) belong to the already described Czech-specific mutations; one LGR (deletion of exons 1-2) was reported from several countries. The deletions of exons 1-17 and 5-14, identified each in four families, represented Czech founder mutations. The present study indicates that screening for LGRs in BRCA1 should include patients from breast or ovarian cancer families as well as high-risk patients with non-familial cancer, in particular cases with early-onset breast or ovarian cancer. On the contrary, our analyses do not support the need to screen for LGRs in the BRCA2 gene. Implementation of chromosome-specific aCGH could markedly facilitate the design of primers for amplification and sequence analysis of junction fragments, especially in deletions overlapping gene boundaries.
  Published data on the association between BRCA2 N372H polymorphism and breast cancer risk are inconclusive. To derive a more precise estimation of the relationship, a meta-analysis was performed. Crude ORs with 95% CIs were used to assess the strength of association between them. A total of 22 studies including 22,515 cases and 22,388 controls were involved in this meta-analysis. Overall, no significant associations were found between BRCA2 N372H polymorphism and breast cancer risk when all studies pooled into the meta-analysis (NH versus NN: OR = 1.01, 95% CI = 0.97-1.05; HH versus NN: OR = 1.05, 95% CI = 0.97-1.13; dominant model: OR = 1.01, 95% CI = 0.98-1.05; and recessive model: OR = 1.05, 95% CI = 0.98-1.13). In the subgroup analysis by ethnicity, still no significant associations were found for Caucasians, Asians, or Africans. When stratified by study design, statistically significantly elevated risk was found for 372H allele based on population-based studies (HH versus NN: OR = 1.11, 95% CI = 1.01-1.21; dominant model: OR = 1.05, 95% CI = 1.00-1.10; recessive model: OR = 1.09, 95% CI = 1.00-1.18). In conclusion, this meta-analysis suggests that the BRCA2 372H allele may be a low-penetrant risk factor for developing breast cancer. However, large sample and representative population-based studies with homogeneous breast cancer patients and well matched controls are warranted to confirm this finding.
  Given the greatly elevated risks of contralateral breast cancer (CBC) observed in breast cancer patients who carry mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2, it is critical to determine the effectiveness of standard adjuvant therapies in preventing CBC in mutation carriers. The WECARE study is a matched, case-control study of 708 women with CBC as cases and 1,399 women with unilateral breast cancer (UBC) as controls, including 181 BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation carriers. Interviews and medical record reviews provided detailed information on risk factors and breast cancer therapy. All study participants were screened for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations using denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) to detect genetic variants in the coding and flanking regions of the genes. Conditional logistic regression was used to compare the risk of CBC associated with chemotherapy and tamoxifen in BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation carriers and non-carriers. Chemotherapy was associated with lower CBC risk both in non-carriers (RR = 0.6 [95% CI: 0.5-0.7]) and carriers (RR = 0.5 [95% CI: 0.2-1.0]; P value = 0.04). Tamoxifen was associated with a reduced CBC risk in non-carriers (RR = 0.7 [95% CI: 0.6-1.0]; P value = 0.03). We observed a similar but non-significant reduction associated with tamoxifen in mutation carriers (RR = 0.7 [95% CI: 0.3-1.8]). The tests of heterogeneity comparing carriers to non-carriers did not provide evidence for a difference in the associations with chemotherapy (P value = 0.51) nor with tamoxifen (P value = 0.15). Overall, we did not observe a difference in the relative risk reduction associated with adjuvant treatment between BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation carriers and non-carriers. However, given the higher absolute CBC risk in mutation carriers, the potentially greater impact of adjuvant therapy in reducing CBC risk among mutation carriers should be considered when developing treatment plans for these patients.
  AIM: To examine the outcome of prophylactic mastectomy in a hospital-based series of BRCA1/2 gene mutation carriers with and without a history of breast cancer. PATIENTS AND METHODS: A center-based consecutive series of 254 BRCA1/2 gene mutation carriers that had prophylactic mastectomy after a normal surveillance round including breast-magnetic resonance imaging were identified. One hundred forty-seven asymptomatic carriers underwent bilateral mastectomy and 107 symptomatic women had contralateral mastectomy after a mean cancer free interval of 3.6 years. All removed breasts were histopathologically examined. RESULTS: In one asymptomatic BRCA2 carrier (0.7%) an occult small invasive breast cancer was diagnosed, while in 6 asymptomatic carriers (4.0% BRCA1 and 4.3% BRCA2) and in 5 symptomatic carriers (2.5% BRCA1 and 10.7% BRCA2) DCIS was detected at prophylactic mastectomy. No breast cancer occurred in the asymptomatic group after a postprophylactic follow-up period of 778 women-years. In the symptomatic carriers 1 invasive breast cancer was detected after 580 follow-up years. From age-, cohort-, and gene-specific reference data we calculated that 15 invasive first cancers in the asymptomatic carriers were prevented during follow-up. CONCLUSION: One invasive breast cancer in 147 bilateral prophylactic mastectomies (0.7%) was detected, this makes a sentinel node procedure redundant and preoperative imaging vital. The prophylactic procedure is highly effective in preventing invasive breast cancer in BRCA1/2 mutation carriers. Since the remaining risk is less than 0.2%/woman-year, continued surveillance of the asymptomatic carriers is not warranted.
  OBJECTIVE: Reproductive factors, such as early age at menarche, late age at menopause, and nulliparity are known risk factors for breast cancer. Previously, we reported these factors to be associated with risk of developing contralateral breast cancer (CBC). In this study, we evaluated the association between these factors and CBC risk among BRCA1 and BRCA2 (BRCA1/2) mutation carriers and non-carriers. METHODS: The WECARE Study is a population-based multi-center case-control study of 705 women with CBC (cases) and 1,397 women with unilateral breast cancer (controls). All participants were screened for BRCA1/2 mutations and 181 carriers were identified. Conditional logistic regression models were used to evaluate associations between reproductive factors and CBC for mutation carriers and non-carriers. RESULTS: None of the associations between reproductive factors and CBC risk differed between mutation carriers and non-carriers. The increase in risk with younger age at menarche and decrease in risk in women with more than two full-term pregnancies seen in non-carriers were not significantly different in carriers (adjusted RRs = 1.31, 95% CI 0.65-2.65 and 0.53, 95% CI 0.19-1.51, respectively). No significant associations between the other reproductive factors and CBC risk were observed in mutation carriers or non-carriers. CONCLUSION: For two reproductive factors previously shown to be associated with CBC risk, we observed similar associations for BRCA1/2 carriers. This suggests that reproductive variables that affect CBC risk may have similar effects in mutation carriers and non-carriers.
  Using conventional Sanger sequencing as a reference standard, we compared the sensitivity, specificity, and capacity of the Illumina GA II platform for the detection of TP53, BRCA1, and BRCA2 mutations in established tumor cell lines and DNA from patients with germline mutations. A total of 656 coding variants were identified in four cell lines and 65 patient DNAs. All of the known pathogenic mutations (including point mutations and insertions/deletions of up to 16 nucleotides) were identified, using a combination of the Illumina data analysis pipeline with custom and commercial sequence alignment software. In our configuration, clonal sequencing outperforms current diagnostic methods, providing a reduction in analysis times and in reagent costs compared with conventional sequencing. These improvements open the possibility of BRCA1/2 testing for a wider spectrum of at-risk women, and will allow the genetic classification of tumors prior to the use of novel PARP inhibitors to treat BRCA-deficient breast cancers.
  Breast cancer is a public health problem in the Western countries. Several studies have shown that BRCA2, like BRCA1 oncosuppressors, are strongly involved in hereditary and sporadic mammary carcinogenesis. It has also been suggested that soy has a protective effect against breast cancer in Asia and, more particularly, phytoestrogens such as daidzein and genistein. Thus, phytoestrogens may have an impact on the expression of BRCA2 gene, and there is a possible link between BRCA2 and genes acting around the BRCA2. To focus on these processes, we set up the BRCA2 specific knockdown by RNA interference in two breast tumor cell lines (MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231) and also in a non-tumorigenic breast cell line (MCF-10a). After inhibition of BRCA2 expression, cells were maintained in different conditions and treated with either daidzein or genistein or left untreated. Microarray analysis of mRNAs isolated from the BRCA2 knocked down MCF-7, MDA-MB-231, and MCF-10a cell lines after being treated with phytoestrogens showed 35 differentially expressed genes between positive-ERbeta cells and negative-ERbeta cells. After genistein or daidzein treatments, BRCA1 was found to be up-regulated when knocked down with BRCA2-siRNA MCF-7 and BRCA2 was found to be up-regulated when knocked down with BRCA2-siRNA MDA-MB 231 cells. In MCF-10a, we observed a significant decrease in BAX and BCL2 expressions with a greater effect of daidzein. We also found an increase in BRIP expression between genistein and daidzein treatment knocked down with BRCA2-siRNA MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines.
  Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) inhibition is toxic to cells with mutations in the breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility genes BRCA1 or BRCA2, a concept termed synthetic lethality. However, whether this approach is applicable to other human cancers with defects in other DNA repair genes has yet to be determined. The ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene is altered in several human cancers including mantle cell lymphoma (MCL). Here, we characterize a panel of MCL cell lines for ATM status and function and investigate the potential for synthetic lethality in MCL in the presence of small-molecule inhibitors of PARP-1. We show that Granta-519 and UPN2 cells have low levels of ATM protein, are defective in DNA damage-induced ATM-dependent signaling, are radiation sensitive, and have cell cycle checkpoint defects: all characteristics of defective ATM function. Significantly, Granta-519 and UPN2 cells were more sensitive to PARP-1 inhibition than were the ATM-proficient MCL cell lines examined. Furthermore, the PARP-1 inhibitor olaparib (known previously as AZD2281/KU-0059436) significantly decreased tumor growth and increased overall survival in mice bearing s.c. xenografts of ATM-deficient Granta-519 cells while producing only a modest effect on overall survival of mice bearing xenografts of the ATM-proficient cell line, Z138. Thus, PARP inhibitors have therapeutic potential in the treatment of MCL, and the concept of synthetic lethality extends to human cancers with ATM alterations.
  BACKGROUND: PALB2 protein was recently identified as a partner of BRCA1 and BRCA2 which determines their proper function in DNA repair. METHODS: Initially, the entire coding sequence of the PALB2 gene with exon/intron boundaries was evaluated by the PCR-SSCP and direct sequencing methods on 70 ovarian carcinomas. Sequence variants of interest were further studied on enlarged groups of ovarian carcinomas (total 339 non-consecutive ovarian carcinomas), blood samples from 334 consecutive sporadic and 648 consecutive familial breast cancer patients, and 1310 healthy controls from central Poland. RESULTS: Ten types of sequence variants were detected, and among them four novel polymorphisms: c.2996+58T>C in intron 9; c.505C>A (p.L169I), c.618T>G (p.L206L), both in exon 4; and c.2135C>T (A712V) in exon 5 of the PALB2 gene. Another two polymorphisms, c.212-58A>C and c.2014G>C (E672Q) were always detected together, both in cancer (7.5% of patients) and control samples (4.9% of controls, p = 0.2). A novel germline truncating mutation, c.509_510delGA (p.R170fs) was found in exon 4: in 2 of 339 (0.6%) unrelated ovarian cancer patients, in 4 of 648 (0.6%) unrelated familial breast cancer patients, and in 1 of 1310 controls (0.08%, p = 0.1, p = 0.044, respectively). One ovarian cancer patient with the PALB2 mutation had also a germline nonsense mutation of the BRCA2 gene. CONCLUSIONS: The c.509_510delGA is a novel PALB2 mutation that increases the risk of familial breast cancer. Occurrence of the same PALB2 alteration in seven unrelated women suggests that c.509_510delGA (p.R170fs) is a recurrent mutation for Polish population.
  OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinical accuracy of magnetic resonance imaging-guided breast vacuum-assisted biopsy (MR-VAB). METHODS: Of 97 scheduled MR-VAB for single MRI lesions (negative second-look sonography) categorised as BI-RADS 4 or 5, 4 were cancelled (undetected lesion = 2, technical problems = 2). Twenty-one patients lost to follow-up were excluded. RESULTS: Twenty-three patients (median age 51 years) were at high risk (BRCA1 = 11, BRCA2 = 7, familial risk = 5), 23 had a suspected local recurrence of breast cancer. Seventy-two imaged lesions (focus = 1, mass enhancement = 32, non-mass-like enhancement = 39) were targeted with a 10-gauge VAB probe using MRI guidance, with a median of 18 specimens per lesion (median procedural time 72 min, range 50-131 min) followed by clip placement. In the case of benignity, MRI follow-up was performed (19 patients, median 389 days, range 33-1,592) or mammography (3 patients, median 420 days, range 372-1,354). According to histopathology results, 29 lesions were benign, 10 were high-risk (papillary = 2, radial scar = 1, atypical epithelial hyperplasia = 7) and 33 malignant (ductal carcinoma in situ = 8, invasive cancers = 25). Three false negative results and 3 complications occurred (1 malaise, 1 skin defect, 1 infection). CONCLUSION: MRI-guided VAB represents an accurate tool for the histological diagnosis of lesions visible only at MRI.
  Several female malignancies including breast, ovarian, and endometrial cancers can be characterized based on known somatic and germline mutations. Initiation and propagation of tumors reflect underlying genomic alterations such as mutations, polymorphisms, and copy number variations found in genes of multiple cellular pathways. The contributions of any single genetic variation or mutation in a population depend on its frequency and penetrance as well as tissue-specific functionality. Genome wide association studies, fluorescence in situ hybridization, comparative genomic hybridization, and candidate gene studies have enumerated genetic contributors to cancers in women. These include p53, BRCA1, BRCA2, STK11, PTEN, CHEK2, ATM, BRIP1, PALB2, FGFR2, TGFB1, MDM2, MDM4 as well as several other chromosomal loci. Based on the heterogeneity within a specific tumor type, a combination of genomic alterations defines the cancer subtype, biologic behavior, and in some cases, response to therapeutics. Consideration of tumor heterogeneity is therefore important in the critical analysis of gene associations in cancer.
  BRIT1 protein (also known as MCPH1) contains 3 BRCT domains which are conserved in BRCA1, BRCA2, and other important molecules involved in DNA damage signaling, DNA repair, and tumor suppression. BRIT1 mutations or aberrant expression are found in primary microcephaly patients as well as in cancer patients. Recent in vitro studies suggest that BRIT1/MCPH1 functions as a novel key regulator in the DNA damage response pathways. To investigate its physiological role and dissect the underlying mechanisms, we generated BRIT1(-/-) mice and identified its essential roles in mitotic and meiotic recombination DNA repair and in maintaining genomic stability. Both BRIT1(-/-) mice and mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) were hypersensitive to gamma-irradiation. BRIT1(-/-) MEFs and T lymphocytes exhibited severe chromatid breaks and reduced RAD51 foci formation after irradiation. Notably, BRIT1(-/-) mice were infertile and meiotic homologous recombination was impaired. BRIT1-deficient spermatocytes exhibited a failure of chromosomal synapsis, and meiosis was arrested at late zygotene of prophase I accompanied by apoptosis. In mutant spermatocytes, DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) were formed, but localization of RAD51 or BRCA2 to meiotic chromosomes was severely impaired. In addition, we found that BRIT1 could bind to RAD51/BRCA2 complexes and that, in the absence of BRIT1, recruitment of RAD51 and BRCA2 to chromatin was reduced while their protein levels were not altered, indicating that BRIT1 is involved in mediating recruitment of RAD51/BRCA2 to the damage site. Collectively, our BRIT1-null mouse model demonstrates that BRIT1 is essential for maintaining genomic stability in vivo to protect the hosts from both programmed and irradiation-induced DNA damages, and its depletion causes a failure in both mitotic and meiotic recombination DNA repair via impairing RAD51/BRCA2's function and as a result leads to infertility and genomic instability in mice.
  Classical Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL) is a cancer in which malignant "Reed-Sternberg" cells comprise just a fraction of the bulk of the tumor and are characteristically binucleated. We recently identified a novel gene, KLHDC8B, which appears responsible for some familial cases of cHL. KLHDC8B encodes a midbody kelch protein expressed during cytokinesis. Deficiency of KLHDC8B leads to binucleated cells, implicating its involvement in Reed-Sternberg cell formation. Interestingly, other cancer genes, such as BRCA1 and BRCA2, also encode proteins locating to the midbody during cytokinesis, even though their participation in other pathways has received greater attention. Midbody components may be an overlooked source of tumor suppressor genes.
  BRCA1 and BRCA2 screening in women at high-risk of breast cancer results in the identification of both unambiguously defined deleterious mutations and sequence variants of unknown clinical significance (VUS). We examined a population-based sample of young women with contralateral breast cancer (CBC, n=705) or unilateral breast cancer (UBC, n=1398). We identified 470 unique sequence variants, of which 113 were deleterious mutations. The remaining 357 VUS comprised 185 unique missense changes, 60% were observed only once, while 3% occurred with a frequency of >10%. Deleterious mutations occurred three times more often in women with CBC (15.3%) than in women with UBC (5.2%), whereas combined, VUS were observed in similar frequencies in women with CBC and UBC. A protein alignment algorithm defined 16 rare VUS, occurring at highly conserved residues and/or conferring a considerable biochemical difference, the majority located in the BRCA2 DNA-binding domain. We confirm a multiplicity of BRCA1 and BRCA2 VUS that occur at a wide range of allele frequencies. Although some VUS inflict chemical differences at conserved residues, suggesting a deleterious effect, the majority are not associated with an increased risk of CBC.
  Using data from the Umbrian Population Cancer Registry (RTUP) we tested the hypothesis of relationships between several subsequent cancer sites in women who had had breast cancer. New patients (7,840) were collected from the RTUP between 01/01/1994 and 31/12/2006; 24 DCO cases were excluded; 332 successive multiple cancers in 320 patients were recorded. Including all second cancers, metachronous contralateral breast cancer, the observed/expected ratio (SIR) was non-significant. Excluding these cases, SIR was significantly lower whether with or without second skin carcinomas. SIR of all second metachronous contralateral cancers, excluding skin carcinomas, was non-significant. Significantly lower risk involved the colorectum, stomach, pancreas and metachronous breast with different histology. A significant excess was found of melanoma and total second breast cancers, including the contralateral. The excessive skin melanoma in breast cancer survivors was attributed to the relationship with BRCA2 and CDKN2A mutation-positive patients. The excess risk due to the CDKN2A mutation should also include pancreatic cancer which, in the present study, presented a significantly lower risk.
  OBJECTIVE: Prevention of ovarian cancer starts with identifying women at high risk for this deadly disease. Once identified, these women can be offered risk-reducing options such as oral contraceptives and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. In this review, strategies for identifying high-risk individuals and the clinical utility of genetic testing for BRCA1 and BRCA2 will be discussed. CONCLUSION: To offer potentially life-saving interventions for at-risk family members, we propose that every woman newly diagnosed with ovarian cancer be offered genetic testing for BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes because mutations in these genes are the strongest known predictors of ovarian cancer risk.
  Identifying a BRCA mutation among families with hereditary breast and ovarian cancer enables distinguishing those who may benefit from a specific medical management. This study aimed to evaluate the uptake of predictive testing among close relatives of a proband in Spanish families with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation, and to determine the associated demographic and clinical predictors. A retrospective cohort of families undergoing clinical genetic testing at four university hospitals in northeastern Spain was considered. From 108 unrelated BRCA1/2 families, 765 close relatives of probands were analyzed. Sixty percent of the first-degree and 28% of the second-degree relatives underwent predictive testing within a median time of 2 and 6 months, respectively, since the mutation disclosure to the proband. Relatives undergoing genetic testing were more likely to be female, first-degree, and belong to a family with a proband who had a high educational level. Relatives were also more likely to have offspring, a previous cancer diagnosis, and to be aged between 30 and 64 years. Among second-degree relatives, having a first-degree relative with cancer was highly correlated with uptake. In conclusion, uptake of BRCA1/2 predictive testing among close relatives was notably high and within a short period of time after disclosure of the mutation to the proband. Being female, a high educational level of the proband, and having a close relative with cancer were associated with uptake among relatives. Further studies are warranted to determine whether information is disseminated properly by probands and to learn about the reasons for those not undergoing testing.
  BACKGROUND/AIMS: BRCA mutation carriers have a high lifetime risk of developing breast and ovarian malignancies. As genetic testing becomes widely available, preventative measures are a choice. We evaluated the characteristics of BRCA mutation carriers who chose prophylactic surgery (PS) compared to those who opted for surveillance. METHODS: A retrospective chart review of patients with a mutation in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes was performed. RESULTS: Ninety women were included, of whom 46 (51%) underwent PS. They were more likely to be a BRCA2 mutation carrier, parous, married, employed, and had a prior history of breast cancer. PS included 39 bilateral salpingo-oophorectomies and 13 mastectomies. Pathology was typically benign; however, 15% showed ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast, 8% reported infiltrating ductal carcinoma of the breast, 3% was adenocarcinoma of the fallopian tube, and 3% was adenocarcinoma of the ovary. CONCLUSION: It is notable that BRCA1 mutation carriers were less inclined to elect for PS. Evaluating the reasons for pursuing PS among women with a BRCA mutation is necessary and will require a larger data set. Long-term follow-up is required to describe the potential side effects of PS on quality of life.

  Fifteen years ago BRCA1 and BRCA2 were reported as high penetrant breast cancer predisposing genes. However, mutations in these genes are found in only a fraction of high risk families. BARD1 is a candidate breast cancer gene, but only a limited number of missense mutations with rather unclear pathogenic consequences have been reported.We screened 196 high risk breast cancer families for the occurrence of BARD1 variants. All genetic variants were analyzed using clinical information as well as IN SILICO predictive tools, including protein modeling. We found three candidate pathogenic mutations in seven families including a first case of a protein truncating mutation (p.Glu652fs) removing the entire second BRCT domain of BARD1. In conclusion, we provide evidence for an increased breast cancer risk associated to specific BARD1 germline mutations. However, these BARD1 mutations occur in a minority of hereditary breast cancer families.
  Fanconi anemia (FA) patients are specifically defective in the repair of interstrand DNA crosslinks (ICLs), a complex process involving at least 13 FA proteins and other repair/checkpoint proteins. Of the 13 FA proteins, FANCD1/BRCA2, FANCD2, and FANCJ were previously found to be functionally conserved in C. elegans. We have also identified C. elegans homologs of FANCM and FANCI, and determined their epistatic relationships with homologs of FANCD2, checkpoint proteins, and RAD51 upon DNA crosslinking. The counterparts of FANCM, FANCI, and three checkpoint proteins (RPA, ATR and CHK1) are required for focus formation and ubiquitination associated with FANCD2 in C. elegans. However, C. elegans FANCM affects neither RPA focus formation nor CHK1 phosphorylation induced by ICLs, unlike the reported role of human FANCM, which influences ATR-CHK1 signaling at stalled replication forks. Although focus formation by both FANCD2 and RAD51 requires ATR-CHK1 signaling, FANCD2 and RAD51 acted independently in the formation of their respective foci. Thus, the FANCD2 activation pathway involving FANCM, FANCI, and the checkpoint proteins is conserved in C. elegans but with distinct differences.
  The transcription factor Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) is a key regulator of cell proliferation and is overexpressed in many forms of primary cancers, leading to uncontrolled cell division and genomic instability. To address the role of FOXM1 in chemoresistance, we generated a cisplatin-resistant breast cancer cell line (MCF-7-CIS(R)), which had an elevated level of FOXM1 protein and mRNA expression relative to the parental MCF-7 cells. A close correlation was observed between FOXM1 and the expression of its proposed downstream targets that are involved in DNA repair; breast cancer-associated gene 2 (BRCA2) and X-ray cross-complementing group 1 (XRCC1) were expressed at higher levels in the resistant cell lines compared with the sensitive MCF-7 cells. Moreover, cisplatin treatment induced DNA damage repair in MCF-7-CIS(R) and not in MCF-7 cells. Furthermore, the expression of a constitutively active FOXM1 (DeltaN-FOXM1) in MCF-7 cells alone was sufficient to confer cisplatin resistance. Crucially, the impairment of DNA damage repair pathways through the small interfering RNA knockdown inhibition of either FOXM1 or BRCA2/XRCC1 showed that only the silencing of FOXM1 could significantly reduce the rate of proliferation in response to cisplatin treatment in the resistant cells. This suggests that the targeting of FOXM1 is a viable strategy in circumventing acquired cisplatin resistance. Consistently, the FOXM1 inhibitor thiostrepton also showed efficacy in causing cell death and proliferative arrest in the cisplatin-resistant cells through the downregulation of FOXM1 expression. Taken together, we have identified a novel mechanism of acquired cisplatin resistance in breast cancer cells through the induction of FOXM1.

  Herein we report the antiproliferative effects of a series of 28 compounds against the MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell line, including the synthesis of seven new [3]ferrocenophanyl and four new ferrocenyl compounds. For each p-R-phenyl substitution pattern investigated, the [3]ferrocenophanyl derivatives were more cytotoxic than the corresponding ferrocenyl derivative, with the highest activity found for compounds with protic substituents. Theoretical calculations of the HOMO-LUMO gap for the molecules in the Fe(3+) oxidation state suggest a higher reactivity for the [3]ferrocenophanyl derivatives. A lead compound from each series, a [3]ferrocenophanyl and a ferrocenyl compound, possessing two phenol groups, were screened against the NCI/DTP 60-cell-line panel. The mean activity over all cell lines was better than cisplatin for both compounds, and both compounds showed subpanel selectivity for leukemia, CNS cancer, and renal cancer. Low systemic toxicity and lack of interaction with DNA (when in the reduced form), suggest that the compounds may act as prodrugs.
  Much attention is directed currently to identifying sub-types of cancers that are genetically and clinically distinct. The expectation is that sub-typing on the basis of somatic genomic characteristics will supplant traditional pathological sub-types with respect to relevance for targeted therapies and clinical course. Less attention has been paid to the goal of validating sub-types on the basis of the distinctiveness of their etiologies. In this article it is shown that studies of individuals with double primary malignancies provide uniquely valuable information for establishing the etiologic distinctiveness of candidate tumor sub-types. Studies of double primaries have the potential to definitively rank candidate taxonomic systems with respect to their etiological relevance by determining which sub-types are most highly correlated in the double primaries. The concept is illustrated with data from studies of the concordance of estrogen and progestin status in bilateral breast cancers, where it is shown that double primaries are much more likely to be concordant with respect to ER status than for PR status. The high concordance of ER status is consistent with a growing literature demonstrating the etiologic distinctiveness of ER+ and ER- tumors.
  Studies have shown an increased risk of malignancies in women with endometriosis. Little is known about the impact of endometriosis on cancer survival. We investigated whether the survival after a diagnosis of a malignancy differs in women with a previously diagnosed endometriosis compared to other women.Women with a first time diagnosis of a malignancy in 1969 - 2005, were identified using the National Swedish Cancer Register (NSCR). By use of the National Swedish Patient Register (NSPR) we identified all women with a diagnosis of endometriosis during the same period and linked these patients with the data from the NSCR. The cohort comprised 4 278 women with endometriosis and a malignancy, and 41 831 randomly selected matched women without endometriosis. Cox regression was used for all calculations to obtain crude and adjusted cause specific mortality rates, measured as hazard ratios (HR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI).46 109 women entered the study. There was a statistically significant better survival for women with endometriosis for all malignancies combined (HR=0.92) and for breast cancer (HR=0.86) and ovarian cancer (HR=0.81) specifically. For breast cancer the survival enhancing effect in women with endometriosis decreased with increasing parity. There was poorer survival in malignant melanoma for women with endometriosis (HR=1.52).The survival in a malignancy is better in women with a previously diagnosed endometriosis compared to women without endometriosis especially for breast and ovarian cancers. The prognosis of malignant melanoma is poorer in women with endometriosis.
  Attempts to find genes contribution to complex diseases, such as cancer, require new study designs which incorporate an efficient use of population resources and modern genotyping technologies. We describe here two approaches, used by us for the study of breast cancer, both of which take the use of biobanks. One uses a cancer registry as a source of case information, which is then linked to a biobank on blood DNA. The biobank provides also samples from matched controls. After genotyping, clinical data are retrieved from hospital records, and the results can be presented for genotype-specific cancer risks, or similarly for genotype-specific clinical and survival parameters. The second approach uses registered data on cancer in families or among twins. On defined groups of patients, paraffin tissue is collected by contacting the pathology departments of the hospitals where the patients were diagnosed. Tumor and healthy tissue is prepared and used for mutation, the loss of heterozygosity, or copy number analysis. We believe that in the era of whole-genome genotyping technologies, the importance of well-characterized sample sets cannot be overemphasized. Samples rather than technologies limit the rate of gene discovery in complex diseases.
  INTRODUCTION: Although the majority of breast cancer patients are older than 65 years, limited data exist regarding the pathological features in very elderly patients. The aim of this study was to evaluate the histological characteristics of breast cancer in women aged over 80 years. METHODS: The histological data were reviewed for 137 women aged 80 years and older who were diagnosed with primary breast carcinoma at a university clinic during the period 1990-2005. RESULTS: Although it is believed that older women have more advanced tumor, the majority of the tumors were assessed as stage I (35%) and II (32.9%). Mucinous, papillary, medullary, tubular, and cribriform histological subtypes have been demonstrated often in this age group (16.8%). In 49.7 and 70.6% of cases, respectively, there were no regional lymph node metastases and no distant metastases. The frequency of ER-positive (72%) and PR-positive (56%) tumors in these patients is high. CONCLUSIONS: An accurate prognostic evaluation at the time of initial diagnosis is of high importance for older patients, since this could avoid unnecessary and risky therapies. As an increasing number of women ≥80 years old may be diagnosed with breast cancer in the coming years, treatment in this specific age group should be individualized to the patient and tumor factors.
  Vasopressin-activated calcium-mobilizing (VACM-1) protein is a cul-5 gene product that forms complexes with a subclass of ubiquitin E3 ligases involved in proteasomal protein degradation. The expression of VACM-1 cDNA in the T47D breast cancer cell line inhibits growth and decreases phosphorylation of mitogen activated protein kinase. Factors that regulate expression or stability of VACM-1 protein have not been identified, however. In our search to identify drugs/substances that may control VACM-1 protein expression, we examined the effects of resveratrol (trans-3,5,4'-trihydroxystilbene), a natural component in the human diet which inhibits tumor initiation and promotion. CMV vector and VACM-1 cDNA stably transfected T47D breast cancer-derived cells were treated with resveratrol and cell growth and VACM-1 protein concentrations were measured. Since the cellular mechanism of resveratrol-dependent inhibition of cell growth also involves the regulation of estrogen receptors, the effect of 17-β-estradiol and resveratrol on ERα levels and on cell growth was examined in control and in VACM-1 cDNA transfected cells. Our results demonstrate that antiproliferative effect of resveratrol observed in the control T47D cancer cells was significantly enhanced in VACM-1 cDNA transfected T47D cells. Western blot results indicated that resveratrol increased VACM-1 protein concentration. Finally, treatment with resveratrol for 24 and 48 h attenuated 17-β-estradiol induced increase in cell growth both in control and in VACM-1 cDNA transfected cells. The effect was significantly higher in the VACM-1 cDNA transfected cells when compared to controls. These results indicate that the antiproliferative effect of resveratrol may involve induction of VACM-1/cul5.
  Sunitinib malate (SU11248) is a multitarget oral tyrosine kinase receptor (RTKs) inhibitor which was approved by FDA in renal cells carcinoma (RCC) and imatinib-resistant or imatinib-intollerant gastrointestinal stromal tumour (GIST). Sunitinib is able to inhibit RTKs such as receptors for platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF-R alpha and beta) and for vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGFRs). It is able to inhibit KIT receptor, colony stimulating factor type 1 receptor (CSF- 1R), glial cell line neutrophic factor receptor (RET), fms-like tyrosine kinase receptor-3 (FLT-3 or CD135), signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) and AKT (protein kinase B) in tumour cells. Many sunitinib targets play important roles in growth and survival of human breast cancer (BC). The "rationale" of sunitinib in BC (with or without others antiagiogenetic therapy) is its ability to block simultaneously intracellular portion of RTKs inhibiting many downstream signals. We overviewed the most relevant studies concerning sunitinib in metastatic BC. Clin Ter 2010; 161(5):475-482.
  The coordination modes of copper(ii) complexes of Schiff base-derived coumarin ligands, which had previously shown good anti-Candida activity, were investigated by pH-potentiometric and UV-Vis spectroscopic methods. These studies confirmed the coordination mode of the ligands to be through the N of the imine and deprotonated phenol of the coumarin-derived ligand in solution. In addition, the more active complexes and their corresponding ligands were investigated in the presence of copper(ii) in liquid and frozen solution by ESR spectroscopic methods. A series of secondary amine derivatives of the Schiff base ligands, were isolated with good solubility characteristics but showed little anti-Candida activity. However, cytotoxicity studies of the secondary amines, together with the copper complexes and their corresponding ligands, against human colon cancer and human breast cancer cells identified the chemotherapeutic potential of these new ligands.
  BACKGROUND: The transcription factor c-Myb has been well characterized as an oncogene in several human tumor types, and its expression in the hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell population is essential for proper hematopoiesis. However, the role of c-Myb in mammopoeisis and breast tumorigenesis is poorly understood, despite its high expression in the majority of breast cancer cases (60-80%). METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We find that c-Myb high expression in human breast tumors correlates with the luminal/ER+ phenotype and a good prognosis. Stable RNAi knock-down of endogenous c-Myb in the MCF7 luminal breast tumor cell line increased tumorigenesis both in vitro and in vivo, suggesting a possible tumor suppressor role in luminal breast cancer. We created a mammary-derived c-Myb expression signature, comprised of both direct and indirect c-Myb target genes, and found it to be highly correlated with a published mature luminal mammary cell signature and least correlated with a mammary stem/progenitor lineage gene signature. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These data describe, for the first time, a possible tumor suppressor role for the c-Myb proto-oncogene in breast cancer that has implications for the understanding of luminal tumorigenesis and for guiding treatment.
  Within healthy human somatic cells, retrotransposition by long interspersed nuclear element-1 (also known as LINE-1 or L1) is thought to be held in check by a variety of mechanisms, including DNA methylation and RNAi. The expression of L1-ORF1 protein, which is rarely found in normal tissue, was assayed using antibodies with a variety of clinical cancer specimens and cancer cell lines. L1-ORF1p expression was detected in nearly all breast tumors that the authors examined, and the protein was also present in a high percentage of ileal carcinoids, bladder, and pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors, as well as in a smaller percentage of prostate and colorectal tumors. Tumors generally demonstrated cytoplasmic L1-ORF1p; however, in several breast cancers, L1-ORF1p was nuclear. Patients with breast tumors displaying nuclear L1-ORF1p had a greater incidence of both local recurrence and distal metastases and also showed poorer overall survival when compared with patients with tumors displaying cytoplasmic L1-ORF1p. These data suggest that expression of L1-ORF1p is widespread in many cancers and that redistribution from cytoplasm to nucleus could be a poor prognostic indicator during breast cancer. High expression and nuclear localization of L1-ORF1p may result in a higher rate of L1 retrotransposition, which could increase genomic instability.
  Breast metastases from an extramammary primary tumor are very rare and the prognosis for such patients is generally poor. We report here on a case of a 42-year-old female with metastasis of non-small cell lung cancer to the breast, and she is now being followed up on an outpatient basis. In 2004, she presented with a solitary pulmonary nodule in the left lung, and this lesion had been noted to have gradually increased in size over time. The final pathological diagnosis was adenocarcinoma, and the diagnosis was made by performing percutaneous needle aspiration and lobectomy of the left upper lobe. Adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy were given. Unfortunately, a nodule in the left breast was noted three years later, and metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer to the breast was diagnosed by excisional biopsy. Making the correct diagnosis to distinguish a primary breast carcinoma from a metastatic one is important, because the therapeutic plan and outcome for these two types of cancer are quite different.
  PURPOSE: Recent research has identified many genes and proteins that play specific roles in the process of systemic metastasis in various types of cancer. Rho GDP dissociation inhibitor 2 (RhoGDI2) has been shown to inhibit metastasis in human bladder cancer, but its role in breast cancer is controversial. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We examined the regulation and clinical significance of RhoGDI2 in Korean breast cancer patients by using proteomic approaches. RESULTS: By using a proteomic approach, we observed an increased expression of RhoGDI2 in human breast cancer tissues when compared to that of the normal breast tissues, and we validated its up-regulation in an independent cohort of 8 breast cancer patients. The clinical implication of a RhoGDI2 expression was investigated in 57 breast cancer patients by performing immunohistochemistry. RhoGDI2 did not show a significant association with the tumor size, lymph node metastasis, the histologic grade or the hormone receptor status. However, the patients with RhoGDI2-expressing tumors had significantly shorter disease-free survival (p=0.043; hazard ratio, 3.87) and distant metastasis-free survival (p=0.039; hazard ratio, 5.15). CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrated a potential role of RhoGDI2 as a poor prognostic marker as well as a potential therapeutic target. The pro-metastatic nature of RhoGDI2 shown in our study may indicate its organ-specific role in cancer metastasis.
  Diabetes, in particular type 2, is associated with an increased incidence of cancer. Although the mortality attributable to cancer in type 2 diabetes is overshadowed by that due to cardiovascular disease, emerging data from epidemiologic studies suggest that insulin therapy may confer added risk for cancer, perhaps mediated by signaling through the IGF-1 (insulin-like growth factor-1) receptor. Co-administered metformin seems to mitigate the risk associated with insulin. A recent series of publications in Diabetologia addresses the possibility that glargine, the most widely used long-acting insulin analogue, may confer a greater risk than other insulin preparations, particularly for breast cancer. This has led to a heated controversy. Despite this, there is a consensus that the currently available data are not conclusive and should not be the basis for any change in practice. Further studies and more thorough surveillance of cancer in diabetes are needed to address this important issue.
  BRCA and poly-ADP ribose polymerase (PARP) regulate pathways of DNA repair. Due to the accumulation of mutations introduced by error-prone DNA repair, breast and ovarian cancers develop in the setting of BRCA deficiency. A series of recent clinical trials has tested the use of PARP inhibition as a therapeutic strategy to target BRCA-deficient tumors.
  PURPOSE: Estimates of insomnia in breast cancer patients are high, with reports of poor sleep lasting years after completion of cancer treatment. This randomized controlled crossover pilot study looked at the effects of individual cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia (IND-CBT-I) on sleep in breast cancer survivors. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Twenty-one participants were randomly assigned to either a treatment group (six weekly IND-CBT-I sessions followed by six weeks of follow up) or a delayed treatment control group (no treatment for six weeks followed by six weekly IND-CBT-I sessions). Of these, 14 participants completed the pilot study (six in the treatment group and eight in the delayed treatment control group). RESULTS: Self-rated insomnia was significantly improved in the treatment group compared to the waiting period in the delayed treatment control group. The pooled pre-post-IND-CBT-I analyses revealed improvements in self-rated insomnia, sleep quality, and objective measures of sleep. CONCLUSIONS: These preliminary results suggest that IND-CBT-I is appropriate for improving sleep in breast cancer survivors. Individual therapy in a clinic or private practice may be a more practical option for this population as it is more easily accessed and readily available in an outpatient setting.
  Boningmycin, a new antibiotic of the bleomycin family, is isolated from the fermentation broth of Streptomyces verticillus var. pingyangensis n.sp. This study aimed to evaluate its antitumor actions and mechanism. The results showed that boningmycin exhibited potent inhibitory effects on several human solid tumor cells and that it was stronger than bleomycin. The administration of boningmycin inhibited the growth of human hepatoma HepG2 xenografts in nude mice, with more efficacy than that of bleomycin. Boningmycin led to an increase of the reactive oxygen species involving iron and caused G2/M phase accumulation in the HepG2 and human breast cancer MCF-7 cells. Two types of cell death, apoptosis and senescence, were detected after exposure to boningmycin. The accumulation of sub-G1 phase cells, an index of apoptosis, and the activation of caspase apoptotic pathways were detected after treatment with higher concentrations of boningmycin. Low concentrations of boningmycin led to a senescent phenotype with an increase in senescence-associated β-galactosidase activity and the time-dependent increase of p21, p27, and p53 expressions from 48 to120 h. Taken together, the results showed that boningmycin exhibits potent antitumor actions through the induction of apoptosis and cellular senescence.
  Cancer stem cells (CSCs)/tumor-initiating cells have been defined as a subset of tumor cells responsible for initiating and sustaining tumor development. Emerging evidence strongly supports the existence of CSCs in various solid tumors, but they have not yet been identified in human gallbladder carcinomas (GBC). In this study, we identified CSCs in primary GBC and in the cell line GBC-SD using the cell surface markers CD44 and CD133. The percentages of CD44(+)CD133(+) cells were 1.76-3.05% in primary tumors and 40.29% in GBC-SD cells. These cells showed stem cell properties, including selfrenewal, differentiation potential and high tumorigenicity. In vitro culture experiments revealed that CD44(+)CD133(+) GBC cells possessed a higher spheroid-colony forming ability in serum-free media than other subpopulations. When injected into nonobese diabetic/severe combined immunodeficient mice, these cells formed new tumors and generated CD44(+)CD133(+), CD44(-) and CD133(-) progeny. CD44(+)CD133(+) cells also showed a high degree of chemoresistance, possibly due to upregulation of the breast cancer resistance protein (ABCG2) and the transcription factor Gli1 in these highly tumorigenic cells. These results suggest that the CD44(+)CD133(+) population exhibited CSC-like characteristics and may thus provide a novel approach to the diagnosis and treatment of GBC.
  In breast cancer, inactivation of the RB tumor suppressor gene is believed to occur via multiple mechanisms to facilitate tumorigenesis. However, the prognostic and predictive value of RB status in disease-specific clinical outcomes has remained uncertain. We investigated RB pathway deregulation in the context of both ER-positive and ER-negative disease using combined microarray datasets encompassing over 900 breast cancer patient samples. Disease-specific characteristics of RB pathway deregulation were investigated in this dataset by evaluating correlation among pathway genes as well as differential expression across patient tumor populations defined by ER status. Survival analysis among these breast cancer samples demonstrates that the RB-loss signature is associated with poor disease outcome within several independent cohorts. Within the ER-negative subpopulation, the RB-loss signature is associated with improved response to chemotherapy and longer relapse-free survival. Additionally, while individual genes in the RB target signature closely reproduce its prognostic value, they also serve to predict and monitor response to therapeutic compounds, such as the cytostatic agent PD-0332991. These results indicate that the RB-loss signature expression is associated with poor outcome in breast cancer, but predicts improved response to chemotherapy based on data in ER-negative populations. While the RB-loss signature, as a whole, demonstrates prognostic and predictive utility, a small subset of markers could be sufficient to stratify patients based on RB function and inform the selection of appropriate therapeutic regimens.
  Purpose: To evaluate the feasibility of adjuvant docetaxel plus cyclophosphamide(TC)therapy for breast cancer. Patients and methods: A total of 16 patients with intermediate risk-breast cancer were enrolled. TC therapy consisted of four courses of docetaxel 75mg/m² plus cyclophosphamide 600 mg/m² intravenous administration over three weeks. Every infusion was premedicated with intravenous administration of granisetron 3 mg plus dexamethasone 16 mg, followed by dexamethasone 8 mg p. o. on days 2 and 3. Results: Due to the allergic reaction, one patient discontinued TC therapy. Fifteen(94%)of the 16 patients completed the scheduled TC therapy. Feasibility was 93. 7%. Grade 3/4 toxicity was limited to leucopenia, neutropenia, and febrile neutropenia. No non-hematological serious adverse events were observed. Conclusion: Adjuvant TC therapy is a feasible option for breast cancer.
  It has been thought that there is a possibility that infusion speed generally affects the manifested frequency of infusion reaction and its strength. The infusion prescription time of trastuzumab should be over 90 minutes according to the package insert. In the infusion US, is possible over 30 minutes after the second time. We sought to evaluate the safety and tolerability of trastuzumab administered as a 30-minute infusion. Patients: Eighteen patients of HER2-positive breast cancer were treated, and their age ranged from 37 to 65 years old(median, 54 years old). Method: Patients were infused with 8mg/kg of trastuzumab over 90 minutes and, if tolerated, all subsequent maintenance doses of 6mg/kg are over 30 minutes. Result: The infusion times for 30 minutes were twice to 17 times(16 times the median). Mild infusion reactions were seen in 2 cases at the time of the initial prescription, but the infusion reaction was not judged from the prescription for 30 minutes. Mild eczema was admitted by 3 cases after prescription. No decline in cardiac function was seen. Conclusion: Our data strongly suggest that trastuzumab can be safely infused over 30 minutes for 6mg/kg maintenance doses. However, it is thought that the number of cases will increase in future, and confirmation is necessary.
  Palliative therapy using radioactive strontium(89Sr)was performed on 60 patients suffering from cancer. Seventy-one percent of the patients had stopped or reduced their opiates and/or analgesics. Pain relief continued for up to three months. Patients with breast and prostatic cancer showed the best pain reduction. However, pain reduction was limited for lung cancer patients. Repeated usage of / 89Sr with/without opiate and analgesics served to maintain the reduced level of pain. Side effects of repeated usage of 89Sr were decrease of hemoglobin, WBC, and platelets. The decreased level was limited within Level 1. The indication of 89Sr therapy is important. DIC cases and renal failure cases will have increased side effect risk. Image diagnosis is also important. A bone scan is a minimum requirement. Poor accumulation of 99mTc-MDP cases are not indication. Rapidly progressive disease cases, radiculopathy cases, and soft tissue invasion cases should not be given 89Sr therapy. At present, the uses of 89Sr are limited to end-stage patients. The use of 89Sr should change from end stage to early stage in combination with chemotherapy.
  African-American (AA) women are more likely to have late stage, aggressive, rapidly growing, and less hormone-responsive breast tumors. An aggressive subtype of cancer, known as "Triple-Negative" (TN), that is negative for Her-2 and for estrogen and progesterone receptors (ER and PR), is reported to be more common in AA women. We examined the clinical, histopathologic, and prognostic features of TN tumors in AA and Caucasian women. Tumor size, grade, histologic type, lymphovascular invasion (LVI), lymph node status, patient survival, ploidy status, and expression of ER, PR, p53, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), MIB-1, Bcl-2, Her-2, p27, and p21 were evaluated. The TN tumors (75%) were high grade, large, aneuploid tumors that occurred in younger women and were more likely to have a high rate of LVI, elevated MIB-1 score, and nodal metastases. Patients with TN tumors showed poorer overall survival. There was no difference in overall or disease-free survival (p = 0.46) in the AA versus Caucasian women. LVI was a significant predictor of overall survival in AA but not in Caucasian women. There were minor differences in histopathologic features, biomarker expressions, and survival in AA and Caucasian women with TN tumors. The absence of LVI in AA patients predicted an excellent probability of survival.
  The aim of this study was to examine the role of cognitive appraisal in predicting psychosocial adjustment during the postradiation treatment transition. A predictive correlational design was used in a convenience sample of 80 patients with breast, lung, and prostate cancer who were receiving radiation therapy. Two weeks prior to completion of treatment, participants completed instruments to measure symptom distress, uncertainty, cognitive appraisal, social support, and self-efficacy for coping. The Psychosocial Adjustment to Illness Scale was administered 1 month after therapy. Adjustment was significantly correlated with all independent variables, age, and comorbidity. Young age and high amounts of threat appraisal, harm/loss appraisal, uncertainty, and symptom distress were significantly associated with poor adjustment. The model predicted 52% of the variability in adjustment. Cognitive appraisal was not a significant explanatory variable for adjustment when controlling for uncertainty, cancer stage, age, and symptom distress. Symptom distress was the only significant predictor of adjustment.
  BACKGROUND: There is an increasing need for the identification of both DNA and RNA biomarkers from pathodiagnostic formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue samples for the exploration of individualized therapy strategies in cancer. We investigated a fully automated, xylene-free nucleic acid extraction method for the simultaneous analysis of RNA and DNA biomarkers related to breast cancer. METHODS: We copurified both RNA and DNA from a single 10-μm section of 210 paired samples of FFPE tumor and adjacent normal tissues (1-25 years of archival time) using a fully automated extraction method. Half of the eluate was DNase I digested for mRNA expression analysis performed by using reverse-transcription quantitative PCR for the genes estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), progesterone receptor (PGR), v-erb-b2 erythroblastic leukemia viral oncogene homolog 2, neuro/glioblastoma derived oncogene homolog (avian) (ERBB2), epoxide hydrolase 1 (EPHX1), baculoviral IAP repeat-containing 5 (BIRC5), matrix metallopeptidase 7 (MMP7), vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA), and topoisomerase (DNA) II alpha 170kDa (TOP2A). The remaining undigested aliquot was used for the analysis of 7 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. RESULTS: In 208 of 210 samples (99.0%) the protocol yielded robust quantification-cycle values for both RNA and DNA normalization. Expression of the 8 breast cancer genes was detected in 81%-100% of tumor tissues and 21%-100% of normal tissues. The 7 SNPs were successfully genotyped in 91%-97% of tumor and 94%-97% of normal tissues. Allele concordance between tumor and normal tissue was 98.9%-99.5%. CONCLUSIONS: This fully automated process allowed an efficient simultaneous extraction of both RNA and DNA from a single FFPE section and subsequent dual analysis of selected genes. High gene expression and genotyping detection rates demonstrate the feasibility of molecular profiling from limited archival patient samples.
  We analyzed whether polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) interfere with the activity of 17 β-estradiol in the proliferation and apoptosis of the MCF-7 cell line. MCF-7 cells were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) without phenol red supplemented with 5% charcoal-treated fetal bovine serum (CD-FBS) for 3 days with 10 nM 17 β-estradiol or 0.1 µM, 0.5 μM and 1 µM of the tested PCB congeners (118, 138, 153 and 180), or both. Cell proliferation was determined by measuring 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation, and cell apoptosis was measured by caspase-9 activity. From the PCB congeners tested, PCB138 and 153 had the highest stimulatory effects on basal cell proliferation as well as the highest inhibitory actions on basal caspase-9 activity. The proliferative and anti-apoptotic actions of PCB138 and 153 were still observed in the presence of 17 β-estradiol, while the actions of PCB118 and 180 were reversed. In conclusion, the results of this study suggest the possibility that PCB138 and 153 contribute to the action of endogenous 17 β-estradiol on cell proliferation and apoptosis in the breast cancer cell line MCF-7.
  OBJECTIVE: The primary objective of this study was to verify whether breast cancer patients aged <35 at diagnosis have poorer prognoses than those aged 35-39, in other words, to identify the prognostic value of age in younger premenopausal patients under 40 years old. The secondary objective was to assess prognostic factors specific for younger premenopausal patients. METHODS: We identified 242 consecutive patients who were diagnosed with stage I-III breast cancer before the age of 40 and underwent surgery between 1990 and 2004. We compared disease-free survival and overall survival in patients aged <35 years and those aged 35-39 years, and evaluated clinicopathological factors associated with disease-free survival or overall survival in each age group and in all patients under the age of 40. RESULTS: Ninety-nine (41%) patients were younger than 35 years and 143 (59%) were between 35 and 39 years. No significant difference in disease-free survival or overall survival was found between the two groups. In our cohort of patients under the age of 40, the independent factors associated with poor disease-free survival and overall survival included positive axillary lymph nodes and triple-negative status, but not age at diagnosis. Adverse prognostic factors also did not differ considerably between the two age groups. CONCLUSIONS: Age at diagnosis was not an independent prognostic factor in our study. Our findings suggest that other clinicopathological features rather than age should be used to determine individualized treatment courses for breast cancer patients younger than 40 years.
  Human breast cancer cells (MCF-7, T-47-D, ZR-75-1) can adapt to circumvent any reduced growth rate during long-term oestrogen deprivation, and this provides three model systems to investigate mechanisms of endocrine resistance in breast cancer. In this paper we report consistent differences in the effects of three growth inhibitors following long term oestrogen deprivation in all three cell models. Long-term oestrogen deprivation of MCF-7, T-47-D and ZR-75-1 cells resulted in reduced growth inhibition by PD98059 (2-10 μg/ml), implying a loss of dependence on MAPK pathways for growth. The growth inhibitor LY294002 (2-10μM) inhibited growth of both oestrogen-maintained and oestrogen-deprived cells with similar dose-responses, implying continued similar dependence on PI3K pathways with no alteration after adaptation to oestrogen independent growth. However, by contrast, long-term oestrogen deprivation resulted in an increased sensitivity to growth inhibition by rapamycin which was not reduced by readdition of oestradiol. The enhanced inhibition of long-term oestrogen-deprived MCF-7-ED, T-47-D-ED and ZR-75-1-ED cell growth by combining rapamycin with LY294002 at concentrations where each alone had little effect offers preclinical support to the development of therapeutic combinations of rapamycin analogues with other PI3K inhibitors in endocrine resistant breast cancer.
  Metformin, an insulin-lowering agent, has been associated with decreased cancer risk in epidemiologic studies in diabetic patients. We performed a comprehensive literature search and meta-analysis of epidemiologic studies to assess the effect of metformin on cancer incidence and mortality in diabetic patients, using Pubmed, ISI Web of Science, Embase, and the Cochrane library until May 2009, with no language or time restrictions. Independent reports with sufficient information to allow risk estimation of cancer risk/mortality and a measure of uncertainty were reviewed and cross-checked independently by three investigators. Eleven studies were selected for relevance in terms of intervention, population studied, independence, and reporting of cancer incidence or mortality data, reporting 4,042 cancer events and 529 cancer deaths. A 31% reduction in overall summary relative risk (0.69; 95% confidence interval, 0.61-0.79) was found in subjects taking metformin compared with other antidiabetic drugs. The inverse association was significant for pancreatic and hepatocellular cancer, and nonsignificant for colon, breast, and prostate cancer. A trend to a dose-response relationship was noted. Metformin is associated with a decreased risk of cancer incidence compared with other treatments among diabetic patients. Given the retrospective nature of most studies and the possibility that the control treatments increase risk, phase II trials are needed before large cancer prevention trials are launched. Cancer Prev Res; 3(11); OF1-11. ©2010 AACR.
  Objectives Our aim was to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of docetaxel versus weekly paclitaxel regimen in patients with metastatic breast cancer previously treated with anthracycline from the Spanish National Health Service (NHS) perspective. Methods A Markov model with a 21-day cycle duration was developed to estimate total treatment-related costs and clinical benefi ts over 5 years of docetaxel (100 mg/m(2)) and weekly paclitaxel (80 mg/m(2)). Patient data were obtained from the Randomized Phase III Study of Docetaxel Compared with Paclitaxel in Metastatic Breast Cancer (TAX- 311) and Anglo-Celtic IV trials. Utilities were obtained from literature, and unitary costs (€2009) from a Spanish health-cost database and the Catalogue of Medicines. Cost and benefits [life-years gained (LYG) and quality-adjusted life years (QALY)] were discounted at 3%. Sensitivity analyses were performed. Results Docetaxel yields higher health benefits (1.83 LYG; 1.08 QALY) than paclitaxel (1.46 LYG; 0.84 QALY). Global costs (treatment, concomitant medication, adverse events management, progression, best supportive care, and end of life phase) per patient were €20,052 and €9,982 with docetaxel and paclitaxel, respectively. Incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) of docetaxel versus paclitaxel was €190/LYG and €295/QALY. Based on a €30,000/QALY threshold, docetaxel has 99% probability of being cost-effective. ICER was mostly sensitive to hazard ratio (HR) (when varied from 1.46 to 1.09; €3,517/ QALY), discount over the ex-lab price of Taxol® (75%; €6,396/QALY) and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) prophylactic treatment (when administered in 60% of cycles instead of 100%; cost saving). Variations in other inputs, such as time horizon (3-10 years), discount rate (0-5%), or adverse event cost (± 25%) were shown not to have relevant influence on the results. Conclusion Compared to weekly paclitaxel, docetaxel therapy is cost effective for treating metastatic breast cancer patients.
  Introduction: The risk of colorectal cancer (CRC) after BC and the additional risk factor of tamoxifen exposure were investigated by several studies with conflicting results. We performed a case-control study aimed at investigating if a past history of breast cancer is a risk factor of developing adenomas or CRC and establishing whether tamoxifen exposure is an additional risk factor. Materials and methods: We enrolled 175 asymptomatic women with a past history of BC and invited them to undergo a screening colonoscopy. In the same period, we enrolled 201 healthy asymptomatic women (HG) with no family history of CRC which were referred to our Unit for a colonoscopy. Results: Mean age at colonoscopy was 56.9 years for BC patients vs. 56.3 years for HG (p=0.58). In 32/175 (18.3%) BC patients, 38 lesions and in 17/201 (8.4%) controls, 20 lesions (p=0.029) were diagnosed. BC patients had 5/32 CRC vs. no CRC in the HG. Multivariate analysis of age, family history of CRC, timing from BC diagnosis and first colonoscopy, tamoxifen treatment revealed that none of the variables were predictive of the presence or absence of adenomas or CRC in the BC group. Discussion: In the present study BC group had a significant higher prevalence of adenoma or CRC than controls. Tamoxifen exposure did not increase the risk of adenoma or CRC. Our data support the hypothesis that BC is a risk condition for adenomas or CRC. The risk is small but present and a screening colonoscopy should be offered to these patients.
  Background: Although national-level organized cancer screening programs have reduced barriers to screening for people of low socioeconomic status, barriers to early screening remain. Our aim was to determine the diffusion pattern and identify the factors associated with early participation in stomach and breast cancer screening programs. Methods: The study population was derived from the Korean National Cancer Screening Survey, conducted in 2007. A stratified random sample of people aged 40 years and older from a nationwide population-based database was gathered in Korea (n=1,517) in 2007. Time of participation in early screening was defined as the number of years that had elapsed between the participant's 30th birthday and the age at first screening. Results: Significant differences were observed in the probability of adopting stomach and breast cancer screening in relation to education, household income, and job level. Results from Cox's proportional hazard model indicated that higher household income was significantly associated with an increased probability of adopting stomach cancer screening earlier (p<0.05), and people with high household incomes were more likely to adopt breast cancer screening earlier than were those with incomes under US$1,500 per month (p<0.01). When considered at a significance level of 0.1, we found that the most highly educated women were more likely than the least educated to be screened early. Conclusions: Despite organized governmental screening programs, there are still inequalities in the early adoption of cancer screening. The results of this study also suggest that inequalities in early adoption may affect participation in regular screening.
  High testosterone levels have been associated with breast cancer. BRCA1 may function as an androgen receptor (AR) co-regulator. We aimed to examine AR haplotype-tagging single-nucleotide polymorphisms (AR htSNPs) and diplotypes in relation to in vivo androgen levels, combined OC use, CAG and GGC genotypes, and BRCA1/2/X family status in 269 young healthy women from breast cancer high-risk families and 56 additional BRCA1/2 mutation carriers. Testosterone, androstenedione, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, and body constitution were measured on cycle days 18-23. Six AR htSNPs and CAG and GGC repeat lengths were genotyped. Most OC users had lower androgen levels than non-users (all Ps<0.0001). Rare variant diplotypes were associated with higher testosterone levels in OC users than in non-users (P(interaction)=0.011). The interaction remained after adjustment for family clustering. Neither individual AR htSNPs nor other diplotypes were significantly associated with androgen levels and did not tag for CAG or GGC genotypes. In the first included woman from each family, the odds of having the most common diplotype was lower in BRCA1 families compared to other families OR 0.41 (95% CI 0.22-0.78). In conclusion, we found few associations between AR htSNPs or diplotypes and androgen levels in women. Diplotypes cannot replace genotyping of microsatellites CAG or GGC. Since testosterone levels are not affected the same way by combined OC use among all women, young women who have higher testosterone levels during combined OC use may belong to the subgroup of women who will not be helped by combined OCs for treatment of androgen-dependent conditions and may be at higher risk for early-onset breast cancer. Whether these women can be identified with AR genotyping needs to be confirmed in an independent cohort.
  There have been several publications of large scale studies with long-term follow up addressing the role of physical activity in the management of breast cancer. Of the twelve studies specifically addressing the effect of physical activity on breast cancer survival, eight showed a statistically significant 50% risk reduction in breast cancer mortality in women who engaged in moderate intensity physical activity before and after their diagnosis of breast cancer. Four smaller studies demonstrated no benefit. Almost all of these observational studies predominantly involved white, professional women from North America and Europe. The positive effects of physical activity were seen for all stages of cancer, with the greatest benefit in steroid receptor positive breast tumours. These studies relied on self-reported questionnaires for recording the levels of physical activity. Despite including thousands of patients, published studies offer no data related to the optimum type, duration and timing of physical activity. Only a few studies provided objective data on physical activity, cardio-respiratory and general fitness. Thus, potential role of physical activity in the management of breast cancer remains far from established. If the beneficial effect of physical activity as demonstrated in the observational studies can be replicated in robust, well designed and well-executed prospective randomised controlled trials, this would provide a tremendous opportunity to enhance adjuvant treatment of breast cancer. By adding physical activity to the spectrum of adjuvant therapies offered to women survival from breast cancer may be enhanced.
  Epidermal growth factor (EGF) and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) signal through EGF and PDGF receptors, which are important receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). Growth hormone (GH) and prolactin (PRL) are four helical bundle peptide hormones that signal via GHR and PRLR, members of the cytokine receptor superfamily. In this study, we examine crosstalk between signaling pathways emanating from these disparate receptor groups (RTKs and cytokine receptors). We find that GH and EGF specifically synergize for activation of ERK in murine preadipocytes. The locus of this synergy resides at the level of MEK activation, but not above this level (ie., not at the level of EGFR, SHC, or Raf activation). Furthermore, dephosphorylation of the scaffold protein, KSR, at a critical serine residue is also synergistically promoted by GH and EGF, suggesting that GH sensitizes these cells to EGF-induced ERK activation by augmenting the actions of KSR in facilitating MEK-ERK activation. Similarly specific synergy in ERK activation is also detected in human T47D breast cancer cells by cotreatment with PRL and PDGF. This synergy also resides at the level of MEK activation. Consistent with this synergy, PRL and PDGF also synergized for c-fos-dependent transactivation of a luciferase reporter gene in T47D cells, indicating that events downstream of ERK activation reflect this signaling synergy. Important conceptual and physiological implications of these findings are discussed.
  PRIMA-1 has been identified as a compound that restores the transactivation function to mutant p53 and induces apoptosis in cells expressing mutant p53. Studies on subcellular distribution of the mutant p53 protein upon treatment with PRIMA-1(Met), a methylated form of PRIMA-1, have suggested that redistribution of mutant p53 to nucleoli may play a role in PRIMA-1 induced apoptosis. Here, we specifically investigated the influence of PRIMA-1 on cellular localization of mutated p53-R280K endogenously expressed in tumour cells. By using immunofluorescence staining, we found a strong nucleolar redistribution of mutant p53 following PRIMA-1 treatment. This subcellular localization was associated to p53 degradation via ubiquitylation. When cells were treated with adriamycin, neither nucleolar redistribution nor mutant p53 down modulation and degradation were observed. Interestingly, cells where p53-R280K was silenced were more sensitive to PRIMA-1 than the parental ones. These results indicate that in some cellular context, the cell sensitivity to PRIMA-1 could depend on the abolition of a gain-of-function activity of the mutated p53, through a protein degradation pathway specifically induced by this compound.
  BACKGROUND: Whether a systemic adjuvant treatment is needed is an area of controversy in patients with node-negative early breast cancer with tumor size of [less than or equal to]1 cm, including T1mic. METHODS: We performed a retrospective analysis of clinical and pathology data of all consecutive patients with node-negative T1mic, T1a, and T1b invasive ductal carcinoma who received surgery between Jan 2000 and Dec 2006. The recurrence free survival (RFS) and risk factors for recurrence were identified. RESULTS: Out of 3889 patients diagnosed with breast cancer, 375 patients were enrolled (T1mic:120, T1a:93, T1b:162). Median age at diagnosis was 49. After a median follow up of 60.8 months, 12 patients developed recurrences (T1mic:4 (3.3%), T1a:2 (2.2%), T1b:6 (3.7%)), with a five-year cumulative RFS rate of 97.2%. Systemic recurrence was identified in three patients. Age younger than 35 years (HR 4.91; 95% CI 1.014-23.763, p=0.048) and triple negative disease (HR 4.93; 95% CI 1.312-18.519, p=0.018) were significantly associated with a higher rate of recurrence. HER2 overexpression, Ki-67, and p53 status did not affect RFS. CONCLUSIONS: Prognosis of node-negative breast cancer with T1mic, T1a and T1b is excellent, but patients under 35 years of age or with triple negative disease have a relatively high risk of recurrence.
  BACKGROUND: The status of estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha) is critical to the clinical prognosis and therapeutic approach in breast cancer. ERalpha-negative breast cancer is clinically aggressive and has a poor prognosis because of the lack of hormone target-directed therapies. Previous studies have shown that epigenetic regulation plays a major role in ERalpha silencing in human breast cancer cells. Dietary green tea polyphenol, ()-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), is believed to be an anticancer agent in part through its regulation of epigenetic processes. RESULTS: In our current studies, we found that EGCG can reactivate ERalpha expression in ERalpha-negative MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. Combination studies using EGCG with the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA), revealed a synergistic effect of reactivation of ERalpha expression in ERalpha-negative breast cancer cells. Reactivation of ERalpha expression by EGCG and TSA treatment was found to sensitize ERalpha-dependent cellular responses to activator 17beta-estradiol (E2) and antagonist tamoxifen in ERalpha-negative breast cancer cells. We also found that EGCG can lead to remodeling of the chromatin structure of the ERalpha promoter by altering histone acetylation and methylation status thereby resulting in ERalpha reactivation. A decreased binding of the transcription repressor complex, Rb/p130-E2F4/5-HDAC1-SUV39H1-DNMT1, in the regulatory region of the ERalpha promoter also contributes to ERalpha transcriptional activation through treatment with EGCG and/or TSA. CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, these studies show that green tea EGCG can restore ERalpha expression by regulating epigenetic mechanisms, and this effect is enhanced when combined with an HDAC inhibitor. This study will facilitate more effective uses of combination approaches in breast cancer therapy and will help to explore more effective chemotherapeutic strategies toward hormone-resistant breast cancer.
  INTRODUCTION: Various multigene predictors of breast cancer clinical outcome have been commercialized, but proved to be prognostic only for hormone receptor (HR) subsets overexpressing estrogen or progesterone receptors. Hormone receptor negative (HRneg) breast cancers, particularly those lacking HER2/ErbB2 overexpression and known as triple-negative (Tneg) cases, are heterogeneous and generally aggressive breast cancer subsets in need of prognostic subclassification, since most early stage HRneg and Tneg breast cancer patients are cured with conservative treatment yet invariably receive aggressive adjuvant chemotherapy. METHODS: An unbiased search for genes predictive of distant metastatic relapse was undertaken using a training cohort of 199 node-negative, adjuvant treatment naive HRneg (including 154 Tneg) breast cancer cases curated from three public microarray datasets. Prognostic gene candidates were subsequently validated using a different cohort of 75 node-negative, adjuvant naive HRneg cases curated from three additional datasets. The HRneg/Tneg gene signature was prognostically compared with eight other previously reported gene signatures, and evaluated for cancer network associations by two commercial pathway analysis programs. RESULTS: A novel set of 14 prognostic gene candidates were identified as outcome predictors: CXCL13, CLIC5, RGS4, RPS28, RFX7, EXOC7, HAPLN1, ZNF3, SSX3, HRBL, PRRG3, ABO, PRTN3, MATN1. A composite HRneg/Tneg gene signature index proved more accurate than any individual candidate gene or other reported multigene predictors in identifying cases likely to remain free of metastatic relapse. Significant positive correlations between the HRneg/Tneg index and three independent immune-related signatures (STAT1, IFN, and IR) were observed, as were consistent negative associations between the three immune-related signatures and five other proliferation module-containing signatures (MS-14, ONCO-RS, GGI, CSR/wound and NKI-70). Network analysis identified 8 genes within the HRneg/Tneg signature as being functionally linked to immune/inflammatory chemokine regulation. CONCLUSIONS: A multigene HRneg/Tneg signature linked to immune/inflammatory cytokine regulation was identified from pooled expression microarray data and shown to be superior to other reported gene signatures in predicting the metastatic outcome of early stage and conservatively managed HRneg and Tneg breast cancer. Further validation of this prognostic signature may lead to new therapeutic insights and spare many newly diagnosed breast cancer patients the need for aggressive adjuvant chemotherapy.
  INTRODUCTION: 17-allyamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17-AAG), a small molecule inhibitor of Hsp90, is currently in clinical trials in breast cancer. However, 17-AAG treatment often results in inhibition of tumor growth rather than shrinkage, making detection of response a challenge. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) and spectroscopic imaging (MRSI) are noninvasive imaging methods than can be used to monitor metabolic biomarkers of drug-target modulation. This study set out to examine the MRS-detectable metabolic consequences of Hsp90 inhibition in a breast cancer model. METHODS: MCF-7 breast cancer cells were investigated, and MRS studies were performed both on live cells and on cell extracts. 31P and 1H MRS were used to determine total cellular metabolite concentrations and 13C MRS was used to probe the metabolism of [1,2-13C]-choline. To explain the MRS metabolic findings, microarray and RT-PCR were used to analyze gene expression, and in vitro activity assays were performed to determine changes in enzymatic activity following 17-AAG treatment. RESULTS: Treatment of MCF-7 cells with 17-AAG for 48 hours caused a significant increase in intracellular levels of choline (to 266 +/- 18% of control, P = 0.05) and phosphocholine (PC; to 181 +/- 10% of control, P = 0.001) associated with an increase in expression of choline transporter SLC44A1 and an elevation in the de novo synthesis of PC. We also detected an increase in intracellular levels of glycerophosphocholine (GPC; to 176 +/- 38% of control, P = 0.03) associated with an increase in PLA2 expression and activity. CONCLUSIONS: This study determined that in the MCF-7 breast cancer model inhibition of Hsp90 by 17-AAG results in a significant MRS-detectable increase in choline, PC and GPC, which is likely due to an increase in choline transport into the cell and phospholipase activation. 1H MRSI can be used in the clinical setting to detect levels of total choline-containing metabolite (t-Cho, composed of intracellular choline, PC and GPC). As Hsp90 inhibitors enter routine clinical use, t-Cho could thus provide an easily detectable, noninvasive metabolic biomarker of Hsp90 inhibition in breast cancer patients.
  BACKGROUND: Polyamine metabolism has a critical role in cell death and proliferation representing a potential target for intervention in breast cancer (BC). This study investigates the expression of spermine oxidase (SMO) and its prognostic significance in BC. Biochemical analysis of Spm analogues BENSpm and CPENSpm, utilized in anticancer therapy, was also carried out to test their property in silico and in vitro on the recombinant SMO enzyme. METHODS: BC tissue samples were analyzed for SMO transcript level and SMO activity. Student's t test was applied to evaluate the significance of the differences in value observed in T and NT samples. The structure modeling analysis of BENSpm and CPENSpm complexes formed with the SMO enzyme and their inhibitory activity, assayed by in vitro experiments, were examined. RESULTS: Both the expression level of SMO mRNA and SMO enzyme activity were significantly lower in BC samples compared to NT samples. The modeling of BENSpm and CPENSpm complexes formed with SMO and their inhibition properties showed that both were good inhibitors. CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that underexpression of SMO is a negative marker in BC. The SMO induction is a remarkable chemotherapeutical target. The BENSpm and CPENSpm are efficient SMO inhibitors. The inhibition properties shown by these analogues could explain their poor positive outcomes in Phases I and II of clinical trials.
  Bone metastases result in considerable morbidity and exert complex demands on health care resources. Additionally, for many patients, metastatic bone disease is a chronic condition affecting quality of life and independence over years rather than months. The bisphosphonates, notably zoledronic acid, have been shown to reduce skeletal morbidity in multiple myeloma, as well as a wide range of solid tumors affecting bone, by 30-50%. Quite appropriately, the bisphosphonates are increasingly used alongside anticancer treatments to prevent skeletal complications and relieve bone pain. In addition, they are increasingly used to prevent cancer treatment-induced bone loss and show promise in the adjuvant setting to prevent metastasis from breast cancer.
  Osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ), previously an entity associated with radiation therapy to the head and neck, has been observed in patients treated with bisphosphonates. Patients with metastatic breast cancer and myelomatous bone disease, commonly treated with high-potency nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates for a prolonged period of time, have the greatest risk of ONJ development. The reported frequency of ONJ ranges from 0.6% to 6.2% in breast cancer and from 1.7% to 15% in patients with multiple myeloma. Osteonecrosis of the jaw has also been observed in patients with other cancers such as prostate cancer and in benign bone disorders such as osteoporosis and Paget's disease in which the incidence is low. Risk factors associated with the development of ONJ include dental extractions, length of bisphosphonate treatment, and the type of bisphosphonate used. In this review, we summarize the reported incidence and risk factors associated with ONJ.
  Mendelian genetics forms the basis for gene-informed risk assessment and management for the patient and family, and should be at the very foundation of 21st century personalization of healthcare. Yet this is an underutilized commodity. Identification and characterization of germline mutations in the RET proto-oncogene, encoding a receptor tyrosine kinase, as causing >90% of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2), an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by medullary thyroid cancer, pheochromocytoma, and hyperparathyroidism, heralded the era of evidence-based molecular diagnosis, predictive testing, genetic counseling, gene-informed cancer risk assessment, and preventative medicine. Since then, many syndromic endocrine neoplasias have proven to fall under this clinically utile and actionable model, such as those caused by mutations in RET, VHL, or SDHB-D. The familial risk associated with epithelial (nonmedullary) thyroid carcinoma is among the highest of all solid tumors, yet only a few highly penetrant heritable epithelial thyroid cancer syndrome exist. This is illustrated by Cowden syndrome, a difficult-to-recognize autosomal dominant disorder characterized by breast, thyroid, and other cancers, caused by germline mutations in PTEN, encoding a phosphatase, and minorly, SDHB/SDHD variants.
  guvenc g., akyuz a. & açikel c.h. (2010) Health Belief Model Scale for Cervical Cancer and Pap Smear Test: psychometric testing. Journal of Advanced Nursing Aim.  This study is a report of the development and psychometric testing of the Health Belief Model Scale for Cervical Cancer and the Pap Smear Test. Background.  While the Champion Health Belief Model scales have been tested extensively for breast cancer and screening for this, evaluation of these scales in explaining the beliefs of women with regard to cervical cancer and the Pap Smear Test has only received limited attention. Methods.  This methodological research was carried out in Turkey in 2007. The data were collected with 237 randomly selected women who met the criteria for inclusion and agreed to participate in this study. The Champion Health Belief Model scales were translated into Turkish, adapted for cervical cancer, validated by professional experts, translated back into English and pilot-tested. Findings.  Factor analysis yielded five factors: Pap smear benefits and health motivation, Pap smear barriers, seriousness, susceptibility and health motivation. Cronbach's alpha reliability coefficients for the five subscales ranged from 0·62 to 0·86, and test-retest reliability coefficients ranged from 0·79 to 0·87 for the subscales. Conclusion.  The Health Belief Model Scale for Cervical Cancer and the Pap Smear Test was found to be a valid and reliable tool in assessing the women's health beliefs. Understanding the beliefs of women in respect of cervical cancer and the Pap Smear Test will help healthcare professionals to develop more effective cervical cancer screening programmes.
  While mammary Paget's disease (MPD) is clearly linked to breast cancer, the histogenesis of extramammary Paget's disease (EMPD) is controversial. Recently NY-BR-1, a differentiation antigen expressed in the breast and in skin adnexal structures was identified. Its protein expression is restricted to normal and neoplastic breast epithelium and to adnexal tumors of the skin. In this study, we examine NY-BR-1 expression by immunohistochemistry in 24 MPD cases with synchronous ductal carcinoma in situ or invasive breast cancer. Results were compared with 26 cases of EMPD of men (n= 4) and women (n= 22) as well as in apoeccrine glands of the axilla and mammary-like glands of the anogenital region. We found NY-BR-1 positivity in 18 of 24 MPD (75%) and in 21 of 26 EMPD (80.8%). All apoeccrine glands of the axilla and mammary-like glands of the anogenital region were NY-BR-1-positive. NY-BR-1 expression is a common finding in MPD and in EMPD. When considering the diagnosis of Paget's disease, NY-BR-1 is a useful diagnostic marker. Furthermore NY-BR-1 positivity in apoeccrine glands of the axilla and anogenital region suggests a potential histogenetic link between these structures and Paget's disease.
  Aims:  In breast-conserving surgery, the width of free margin around a tumour to ensure adequate excision is controversial. The aim of this study was first to evaluate the frequency of residual disease in wider excision specimens in patients who undergo further surgery because of close margins of < 5 mm. Secondly, the ability of demographic and tumour-related factors to predict the close margins was appraised. Patients and methods:  Three-hundred-and-three patients were included in the study. Patients undergoing wider excision were assessed for the presence of residual disease, and this was tested for association with the width of the initial free margin. Various factors were studied for association with close or involved margins by univariate analysis. Results:  Fifty-three per cent of patients were eligible for re-excision based on the need for a 5-mm clearance. With a free margin of 2 mm or more from invasive tumour, the probability of finding residual disease was 2.4%. The probability of residual disease was higher for ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) and did not decline with increasing the free margin width. Tumour size, lobular cancer type, vascular invasion and nodal involvement were associated with close margins. Conclusions:  We suggest that a free margin of 2 mm from invasive tumour is adequate to minimise residual disease, whereas the equivalent free margin for DCIS remains unclear. Patients with large tumours and lobular cancer type should be counselled at the time of first surgery concerning the higher risk of further excision and mastectomy.
  Runx2 has been proposed as one of the pivotal factors in the process of osteogenesis and metastasis in human malignancies including breast cancer, but its details have not been evaluated. Therefore, in this study, we evaluated its expression in human breast cancer using immunohistochemistry. One hundred and thirty-seven formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded breast cancer specimens were used in this analysis of immunohistochemical study. Immunoreactivity was evaluated using the labeling index (LI). Runx2 immunoreactivity was detected in both carcinoma and stromal cells, as well as non-pathological ductal cells. The nuclear LI of Runx2 in carcinoma cells was associated with the clinical stage, histological grade and HER2 status of the patients examined. In addition, among the patients not associated with distant metastasis, those with high Runx2 LI demonstrated a significantly worse clinical outcome than those with a low LI. This was more pronounced in the group of estrogen receptor (ER)-negative cases. In addition, both univariate and multivariate analyses demonstrated that the Runx2 LI in breast carcinoma cells turned out an independent prognostic factor. Results of our present study demonstrated that Runx2 plays very important roles in the progression of breast cancer, especially in those of ER-negative cases. (Cancer Sci, doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01742.x, 2010).
  Abstract Objective: Awareness of heart disease as the leading cause of death in women has increased over the past 10 years, but little is known about the awareness level of college students. This study evaluated the level of awareness and knowledge of heart disease in women among college students. Methods and Results: Using a cross-sectional design, a sample of 320 women from a private university was queried. A 13-item survey assessed demographic information and awareness of cardiovascular disease (CVD). The mean age was 23 years; the majority were single and of Hispanic ethnicity. Almost one third believed breast cancer was the greatest problem facing women. One half recognized CVD as the leading cause of death among women. Students aged 18&#x2013;24 years were significantly less likely to identify heart disease/heart attack as the leading cause of death in women compared with students aged 25&#x2013;34 years. Significant ethnic differences in perceptions of risk were found. Family history and obesity were seen as major contributors to CVD; less than a fourth ever discussed CVD with their healthcare provider. Information was gained primarily from television, magazines, and the Internet. Exercise and maintenance of healthy blood pressure were viewed as priorities in prevention of CVD. Conclusions: Results add to the body of research on CVD risk and the need for intervention to increase awareness and knowledge of heart disease risk among younger and ethnically diverse young women and raises questions about the role of colleges and universities in promotion of student health. Colleges and universities may provide the last opportunity to reach youth as a group to affect lifestyle changes.
  Ridaforolimus (AP23573; MK 8669) is an analog of sirolimus and a small molecule inhibitor of the mammalian target of rapamycin for the treatment of cancer. Both intravenous and oral formulations of the compound are being tested in clinical trials for the treatment of soft-tissue and bone sarcomas. It is in phase III development for sarcoma in the EU and US, and phase II for breast cancer, endometrial cancer, non-small cell lung cancer, and prostate cancer in the US and other markets in the world. This review discusses the key development milestones and therapeutic trials of this drug.
  It has been indicated that renin-angiotensin system (RAS) has role in various steps of cancer progression. The presence of RAS components has been shown in normal and breast cancer tissue. Insertion/Deletion (I/D) is one of angiotensin I converting enzyme (ACE) polymorphisms and A1166C is one of Angiotensin II type-1 receptor (AT1R) polymorphisms which have been associated with various diseases such as cardiovascular diseases. In the present study, we aimed to substantiate the putative significance of ACE and AT1R on breast cancer biology by investigating the influence of their gene polymorphisms on breast cancer progression. The I/D and A1166C polymorphisms were evaluated by using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP), respectively in 70 breast cancer patients diagnosed with invasive breast cancer and 70 healthy women. Breast cancer prognostic factors were obtained from medical and pathology reports of patients. There was no significant difference between cases and controls for ACE (I/D) (P = 0.15) and AT1R (A1166C) genotypes (P = 0.86). In breast cancer patients, when DD genotype was used as reference group, the combination of II and ID genotypes was associated with increased HER-2 expression (P = 0.020; OR, 4.58; 95% CI, 1.26-16.60). Also, when AA genotype was used as reference group, the AC genotype was associated with higher tumor TNM stage (P = 0.024; OR, 4.66; 95% CI, 1.18-18.35). This is the first study indicating that ACE (I/D) polymorphism is associated with HER-2 expression and AT1R (A1166C) polymorphism is associated with tumor TNM stage in breast cancer patients. Mol. Carcinog. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
  BACKGROUND:: Invasive ductal carcinoma with osteoclast-like giant cells (OGCs) is a very rare breast tumor the main characteristic of which is the presence of multinucleated cells of histiocytic nature. METHODS:: The authors report a study of 8 consecutive cases of fine-needle aspiration cytopathology (FNAC) of breast nodules in which OGCs and malignant epithelial cells were associated and diagnosed as mammary carcinoma with OGCs. These cases were selected over a period of 5 years from more than 6000 patients who were examined during a weekly, single-day, multidisciplinary breast clinic. The corresponding biopsies and surgical specimens were examined histologically in an immunohistochemical study using a histiocytic marker (cluster of differentiation 68 [CD68]). RESULTS:: Conventional histologic analysis made it possible to diagnose 5 of the 8 cases as mammary carcinoma with OGCs; whereas, in the other 3 cases, OGCs were not detected without the help of immunohistochemistry. CONCLUSIONS:: FNAC appeared to be a very efficient way to diagnose breast carcinoma with OGCs, because it detected forms with only a few OGCs that usually are not observed at histologic diagnosis. Consequently, the current results indicated that mammary carcinoma with OGCs may be more frequent than reported previously. Cancer (Cancer Cytopathol) 2010. © 2010 American Cancer Society.
  BACKGROUND:: Women with breast cancer are more likely to have a second breast cancer than women in the general population are to have a primary cancer. However, the biological relationship between primary and second breast cancers is not clear. METHODS:: A total of 30,617 patients diagnosed with bilateral breast cancers between 1990 and 2007 were identified through 17 cancer registries of the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results program. Logistic regression with odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) was used to model strength of association in hormone receptor status, grade, and histology between 2 cancers. RESULTS:: There was a strong association in estrogen receptor status between 2 bilateral tumors (OR, 7.64; 95% CI, 7.00-8.35). The strength of association in estrogen receptor status depended on the time interval between the first and second tumors and age at diagnosis. The OR was 25.9 for synchronous tumors (within 1 month) and 3.69 for metachronous tumors separated by ≥10 years. The strength of association was stronger in patients whose first cancer was diagnosed before age 50 (OR, 11.7) versus after age 50 (OR, 5.71). A similar pattern was observed for progesterone receptor, grade, and histological type, but with relatively weaker association. CONCLUSIONS:: The strong concordance in hormone receptor status of primary and second breast cancers suggests that 2 breast cancers arise in a common milieu and that tumor subtypes are predetermined in the early stage of breast carcinogenesis. Cancer 2010. © 2010 American Cancer Society.
  BACKGROUND:: Although the use of SSM is becoming more common, there are few data on long-term, local-regional, and distant recurrence rates after treatment. The purpose of this study was to examine the rates of local, regional, and systemic recurrence, and survival in breast cancer patients who underwent skin-sparing mastectomy (SSM) or conventional mastectomy (CM) at our institution. METHODS:: Patients with stage 0 to III unilateral breast cancer who underwent total mastectomy at our center from 2000 to 2005 were included in this study. Kaplan-Meier curves were calculated, and the log-rank test was used to evaluate the differences between overall and disease-free survival rates in the 2 groups. RESULTS:: Of 1810 patients, 799 (44.1%) underwent SSM and 1011 (55.9%) underwent CM. Patients who underwent CM were older (58.3 vs 49.3 years, P<.0001) and were more likely to have stage IIB or III disease (53.0% vs 31.8%, P<.0001). Significantly more patients in the CM group received neoadjuvant chemotherapy and adjuvant radiation therapy (P<.0001). At a median follow-up of 53 months, 119 patients (6.6%) had local, regional, or systemic recurrences. The local, regional, and systemic recurrence rates did not differ significantly between the SSM and CM groups. After adjusting for clinical TNM stage and age, disease-free survival rates between the SSM and CM groups did not differ significantly. CONCLUSIONS:: SSM is an acceptable treatment option for patients who are candidates for immediate breast reconstruction. Local-regional recurrence rates are similar to those of patients undergoing CM. Cancer 2010. © 2010 American Cancer Society.
  In Europe one out of every nine women suffers from breast cancer during her lifetime. Since the introduction of mammography screening programs more breast cancers are being diagnosed when they are still small and early stage cancers with a favourable prognosis. The introduction of digital mammography systems has led to a continuous reduction of breast cancer mortality especially in specific patient subgroups. Furthermore, the digital mammography platform enables the development of new, innovative breast imaging methods to increase sensitivity and decrease breast cancer mortality. This digital mammography platform includes digital breast tomosynthesis, digital contrast medium mammography and digital contrast medium breast tomosynthesis as well as fused data sets from digital mammography with ultrasound or MRI. The following article summarizes these new applications, describes the strengths of the digital platform and illustrates the potential advantages of an improved breast cancer diagnosis by digital mammography.
  Women with an elevated risk for breast cancer require intensified screening beginning at an early age. Such high risk screening differs considerably from screening in the general population. After an expert has evaluated the exact risk a breast MRI examination should be offered at least once a year and beginning latest at the age of 30 depending on the patients risk category. Complementary mammograms should not be performed before the age of 35. An additional ultrasound examination is no longer recommended. To ensure a high sensitivity and specificity high risk screening should be performed only at a nationally or regionally approved and audited service. Adequate knowledge about the phenotypical characteristics of familial breast cancer is essential. Besides the common malignant phenotypes, benign morphologies (round or oval shape and smooth margins) as well as a low prevalence of calcifications have been described. Using MRI benign contrast media kinetics as well as non-solid lesions with focal, regional and segmental enhancement can often be visualized.
  INTRODUCTION: As with other illnesses, several variables can impact the transition back to the workplace, long-term work productivity, or job retention among cancer survivors. We developed a model related to work and cancer based in part on the general area of work disability and the specific literature on cancer survivors and work. METHODS: A systematic search of the literature on work and cancer was conducted to determine whether an evidence base existed to support the proposed model. RESULTS: Forty-five papers met the review criteria. The percentage of studies that addressed modifiable categories included in the proposed model was: health and well-being (20%), symptoms (16%), function (24%), work demands (9%), work environment (18%), and policy, procedures, and economic factors (16%). Return to work was the most common work outcome studied although problems with productivity and retention are reported in the general cancer and work literature. Wide variation in definition of cancer survivor was reported and breast cancer survivors were studied most often. Each of the categories in the model has some empirical support. DISCUSSION: The model considers the health, functional status in relation to demands, work environment, and policy, procedures, and financial factors. The model allows the clinician and survivor to consider factors that can be addressed by the health care provider, survivor, and workplace. Implications for Cancer Survivors. This model provides a framework to aid in conceptualizing problems related to work.
  Every-2-week (dose-dense) adjuvant doxorubicin (A) plus cyclophosphamide (C) followed by paclitaxel is a safe and effective adjuvant chemotherapy regimen. Every-3-week nab-paclitaxel is safe and more effective at 50% higher dose than every-3-week paclitaxel in metastatic breast cancer (BC). This study evaluated the safety of adjuvant dose-dense AC followed by dose-dense nab-paclitaxel for early-stage BC. Women with operable, histologically confirmed BC received four cycles of dose-dense A 60 mg/m(2) plus C 600 mg/m(2) with pegfilgrastim, followed by dose-dense 260 mg/m(2) nab-paclitaxel (with pegfilgrastim given as needed). Endpoints were adverse events (AEs), including myelosuppression. Patients with neuropathy were followed until symptom improvement to grade ≤1. Thirty women received four cycles of dose-dense AC with no unanticipated AEs, one withdrew after AC therapy. Of 29 women who began nab-paclitaxel therapy, 27 received all the four doses (mean cumulative dose, 959 mg/m(2)); one discontinued nab-paclitaxel after two doses due to unacceptable AEs. Four patients had a grade 3 nab-paclitaxel-related neuropathy (no grade 4 event). Of 29 patients, 34% received pegfilgrastim during nab-paclitaxel therapy and 31% had a nab-paclitaxel treatment delay, mainly due to hematologic toxicity. Based on the Kaplan-Meier probability estimates, the percentage of patients having ≤1 grade neuropathy at the end of treatment, 2, and 8 months after treatment were 59, 79, and 97%. Administering adjuvant dose-dense AC followed by 260 mg/m(2) dose-dense nab-paclitaxel was feasible in women with early-stage BC, with manageable AEs. Most patients had ≤1 grade neuropathy 2 months after treatment completion.
  Breast cancer patients must often decide between multiple adjuvant therapy options to prevent cancer recurrence. Standard practice, as implemented in current decision support tools, is to present information about all options simultaneously, but psychology research suggests that sequential decision processes might improve decision making. We tested whether asking women to consider hormonal therapy and chemotherapy separately would improve women's risk knowledge and/or affect treatment intentions. We conducted an Internet-administered experimental survey of a demographically diverse sample of 1,781 women ages 40-74. Participants were randomized to experience a standard, comprehensive decision process versus sequential (one at a time) decisions regarding adjuvant therapy options for a hypothetical breast cancer patient with an estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) tumor. We assessed comprehension of key statistics, perceptions of treatment effectiveness, and perceived interest in adjuvant chemotherapy, as well as participants' numeracy levels. When participants made sequential decisions, they demonstrated greater comprehension of decision-relevant risk statistics, as compared to when they made decisions all at once (all P's < 0.001). Among higher-numeracy participants, those making sequential decisions were less interested in chemotherapy (P < 0.001). Lower-numeracy participants who considered all options simultaneously were insensitive to the degree of risk reduction, but those who made sequential decisions were sensitive (P = 0.03). In conclusion, presenting adjuvant therapy options sequentially improves women's comprehension of incremental treatment benefit and increases less numerate women's sensitivity to the magnitude of the achievable risk reduction over standard, all at once approaches. Sequential approaches to adjuvant therapy decisions may reduce use of chemotherapy among those at low risk for recurrence.
  Phyllodes tumors of the breast are rare fibroepithelial neoplasms with a potential for recurrence. Current histological classification is not always predictive of clinical behavior. The aim of this study was to identify genetic changes associated with the development of borderline and malignant phyllodes tumors in an Asian population, and to assess if genetic data supported the categorization of these tumors into the existing three grades of benign, borderline, and malignant. Expression profiling of 21 phyllodes tumors (6 benign, 10 borderline, 5 malignant) was performed using Affymetrix U133Plus 2.0 GeneChips(®). Gene expression among benign, borderline, and malignant tumors was compared and a 29 gene list was able to classify them according to their histologic grade. Among these 29 genes are those responsible for matrix formation, cell adhesion, epidermis formation, and cell proliferation. Comparative genomic microarray analysis showed that the most common chromosomal alteration associated with borderline and malignant tumors was 1q gain, and an increasing number of chromosomal changes was noted with increasing histological grade. Upregulation of HOXB13 was seen in malignant relative to borderline phyllodes tumors and further investigated by immunohistochemistry in a corresponding set of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumors. HOXB13 protein overexpression was found to be correlated with stromal hypercellularity and atypia (P = 0.03, P = 0.039, respectively) and may be implicated in the development of malignant phyllodes tumors.
  Flat epithelial atypia (FEA) is recognized as a precursor of breast cancer and its management (surgical excision or intensive follow-up) remains unclear after diagnosis on core needle biopsy (CNB). The aim of this study was to determine the underestimation rate of pure FEA on CNB and clinical, radiological, and pathological factors of underestimation. 4,062 CNBs from 5 breast cancer centers, performed over a 5-year period, were evaluated. A CNB diagnosis of pure FEA was made in 60 cases (1.5%) (the presence of atypical ductal hyperplasia, lobular neoplasia, radial scars, phyllodes tumor, papillary lesions, ductal carcinoma in situ or invasive carcinoma at CNB were exclusion criteria), and subsequent surgical excision was systematically performed. The histological diagnosis was retrospectively reviewed using standardized criteria and the precise terminology of the World Health Organization by two pathologist physicians. At surgical excision, 6 (10%) ductal carcinoma in situ and 2 (3%) invasive carcinoma were diagnosed. The total underestimation rate was 13%. FEA was associated with atypical ductal hyperplasia in 10 (17%) cases and with lobular neoplasia in 2 (3%) at final pathology. Residual FEA was found in 14 (23%) cases. No clinical, radiological or pathological factors were significantly associated with underestimation. Our data highlight the importance of recognizing and diagnosing FEA in core needle biopsies. Thus, the presence of FEA on CNB, even in isolation, warrants follow-up excision.
  The mTOR pathway is pivotal not only in tumorigenesis but also in chemotherapy and hormonal drug sensitivity. It is clear that improvements in using new targeted therapies are required to improve breast cancer (BC) outcome. Nevertheless, to achieve this, new molecular biomarkers are required to define the potential sensitivity or resistance of cancer cells. By targeting the mTOR pathway, several critical central transduction pathways that sustain BC are abrogated (HER-2/Neu and the estrogen receptor pathway). Thus, the compounds that inhibit mTOR have a double mechanism of toxicity on BC cells when used in combination with a currently used drug: (1) overcoming primary drug resistance and (2) restoring sensitivity when resistance arises after long-term exposure. This review covers the utility of inhibitors of the mTOR pathway in BC and emphasizes the new paradigm of close symbiosis between oncology and molecular biology to better profiling and treating BC with a targeted approach. In particular, we focused on the new drug RAD001 (Everolimus) due to the great results from preclinical and clinical trials make it the most hopeful compound among mTOR inhibitors for the treatment of BC.
  The symptoms of ovarian tumor are not specific and a rare presentation of the tumor is as the content of an inguinal hernia. We reported a case of an 82-year-old woman, diagnosed with breast cancer and with a concomitant hypoecoic adnexal mass at the ecographic exam. The patient was treated with conservative breast surgery and laparotomy. A cystic-solid ovarian lesion was found inside the right inguinal canal. Frozen-section examination was negative for malignancy, and the anatomopathological analysis revealed a borderline ovarian tumor.
  BACKGROUND: S-1 is an orally administered fluorinated pyrimidine with high activity in metastatic breast carcinoma (MBC) and in chemotherapy-pretreated metastatic breast carcinoma. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Forty patients with MBC who did not respond to capecitabine-based chemo-therapy and then received S-1 were identified from our data base of records between 2006 and 2008. The clinico-pathological data and outcomes of these patients were then reviewed. RESULTS: The overall response rate was 27.8%. The median survival was 19.2 months, and the median time to disease progression was 6.2 months. The most common treatment-related adverse events (all grades) were hand-foot syndrome (15%), nausea (15%), vomiting (7.5%), disorder of taste (7.5%), and diarrhea (5%). However, the majority were mild to moderate in intensity, and only one patient experienced grade 3 (according to the National Cancer Institute of Canada Common Toxicity criteria) adverse events. Myelosuppression and alopecia were rare, and there were no reported treatment-related deaths. CONCLUSION: The results of the current study demonstrate that S-1 is an effective and well-tolerated treatment in patients with capecitabine-resistant MBC. In addition, it is a convenient, orally administered drug, which makes it an attractive agent for use in outpatient treatment.
  BACKGROUND: 5-HTTLPR genetic polymorphism of serotonin transporter (SERT) and stressful life events facilitate depression. The aim of this investigation was therefore to determine the correlations between SERT polymorphism and mental adjustement to cancer. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Breast cancer patients early after surgery, and subjects with various advanced tumours were recruited, evaluated using the Mini Mental Adjustment to Cancer Scale and Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS), and genotyped. RESULTS: In early breast cancer patients (n=53), hopelessness-helplessness (HH) and anxious preoccupation (AP) significantly correlated with depression and anxiety; avoidance (AV) correlated with anxiety. Advanced cancer patients (n=73) displayed similar correlations, and a negative correlation of HADS depression with fighting spirit (FS) and AV. The stratification for 5-HTTLPR showed that early breast cancer carriers of the L/L variant displayed a significant correlation between HH and depression. CONCLUSION: Among early breast cancer patients, a specific set, characterized by their 5-HTTLPR variant, display differential correlations between HH and depression, with possible implications for treatment options.
  Aim: This was a phase II study to assess the activity of a novel neoadjuvant regimen in locally-advanced breast cancer. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Fifty patients with histological confirmation of locally advanced breast cancer received treatment with gemcitabine 1000 mg/m(2) (day 1) followed by gemcitabine 800 mg/m(2) plus docetaxel 75 mg/m(2) plus pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (PLD) 30 mg/m(2) (day 8) every 3 weeks for at least 4 cycles, plus a final 2 additional cycles. Tumour size was T1 (n=2), T2 (n=32), T3 (n=14), T4 (n=2). All 50 patients underwent surgery. RESULTS: Clinical complete, partial and no response were observed in 13 (26%), 24 (48%) and 11 (22%) patients, respectively (overall response rate: 74%). The number of chemotherapy cycles was found to be an independent predictor of a pathologic complete response. CONCLUSION: The combination of gemcitabine-docetaxel-PLD can yield high tumour response rates in patients with locally-advanced breast cancer who undergo a full treatment of 6 cycles.
  BACKGROUND: Adverse outcomes in breast cancer patients treated with recombinant human erythropoietin (rhEpo) have been linked to the expression of Epo-receptors (EpoR) in cancer cells, although limited data on the clinical significance of these observations are available. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Tissue samples from 107 patients with breast cancer who did not receive rhEpo and from 12 patients with benign lesions were retrospectively analysed for EpoR expression by RT-PCR and Western blot, and the results were correlated to clinical and demographic data. RESULTS: While EpoR levels were not linked to anaemia or inflammation, they were positively associated with progesterone and oestrogen receptor status. Patients with increased EpoR-mRNA expression had a higher local cancer recurrence rate (p=0.021), however, no significant difference in overall survival was observed. CONCLUSION: Since EpoR expression is associated with hormone receptor positivity and decreased locoregional disease control, this parameter characterises a specific cancer phenotype rather than being a negative predictor itself.
  Metastatic tumours of the stomach have been reported to result from various types of cancer. Among them, gastric metastasis from breast cancer has been recognised in 0.3-18% patients (1-4). Here, a rare case of metastatic gastric tumour derived from breast carcinoma is reported. Gastric endoscopy confirmed a large, friable mass (approximately 5 cm in diameter) in the upper part of the gastric body. The mass within the stomach was difficult to distinguish from primary gastric cancer, although biopsies of this lesion revealed the characteristics of adenocarcinoma. In addition, immunohistochemistry showed the positive expression of mammaglobin. Taken together, the evidence pointed to metastasis of breast cancer to the stomach. The patient was treated with hormonal therapy (letrozole), and the size of the metastasis in the stomach was markedly reduced. Therefore, a gastric metastasis from breast cancer was diagnosed successfully using immunohistochemistry and unnecessary surgery was avoided. In conclusion, although gastric metastatic tumours derived from breast carcinoma are rare, their accurate pre-operative diagnosis and appropriate systemic treatment is essential.
  BACKGROUND: The potential for radiofrequency ablation (RFA) therapy is an area of increasing interest in the context of breast conserving therapy for breast cancer. This non surgical technique potentially provides a non invasive, cosmetically pleasing result that is preferable to surgeon and patient. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A literature review was carried out facilitated by PubMed and Medline databases. Cross referencing of the obtained articles was used to identify other relevant studies. A total of 17 studies were reviewd. RESULTS: RFA is emerging as a promising treatment for breast cancer. Pilot and phase II studies have shown RFA to be effective at ablation with few complications or adverse effects experienced by patients. However, complete ablation of tumours is still not achieved in all patients. CONCLUSION: RFA represents a promising therapeutic medality for breast lesions. However, there is a clear need for further research and refinement of the procedure before it can be offered as a therapeutic alternative to surgical excision for operable breast cancer.
  Previously, we and other groups reported that liver X receptor (LXR) agonists T0901317, 22(R)-hydroxycholesterol, and 24(S)-hydroxycholesterol suppressed the proliferation of prostate and breast cancer cells. In this study, we report that T0901317 and 22(R)-hydroxycholesterol treatment inhibited the proliferation of different progression stages of LNCaP human prostate cancer cells, as well as different commonly used human cancer cell lines. Cancer cell lines with higher LXRα mRNA expression were more sensitive to 22(R)-hydroxycholesterol-induced inhibition. T0901317 treatment decreased the percentage of the cell population in S-phase and caused G(1) cell cycle arrest. Overexpression of S-phase kinase-associated protein 2 (Skp2) partially blocked the suppressive effect of T0901317 treatment. Modulating LXR signaling is therefore a potential adjuvant therapy for advanced prostate cancer and other types of cancer.
  BACKGROUND: In human breast cancer, a growth status switched from estrogen-dependent to growth factor-dependent is a critical step during development of acquired tamoxifen resistance. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying this switch remain poorly understood. The Wilms' tumor suppressor gene, WT1, encodes a zinc-finger protein WT1 that functions as a transcription regulator. High levels of the WT1 expression have been associated with de novo tamoxifen resistance. The goal of this study was to investigate the function of WT1 in acquired tamoxifen resistance. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A stable tamoxifen-resistance cell line MCF7(TAM) was established by selecting ER-positive breast cancer MCF7 cells in a medium containing tamoxifen. Western blot, cell growth assay and shRNA method were used to examine the role of WT1 in acquired tamoxifen resistance. RESULTS: MCF7(TAM) cells expressed EGFR, HER2 and WT1 at higher levels compared to tamoxifen-sensitive parental MCF7 cells. MCF7(TAM) cells responded weakly to estrogen stimulation, grew rapidly in the absence of estrogen and were insensitive to tamoxifen. We also established stable cell lines from MCF7(TAM) cells to express shRNA specific for WT1, and found expression levels of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), HER2 and estrogen receptor (ER)-α to be down-regulated in MCF7(TAM) cells with knocked-down levels of WT1 expression. MCF7(TAM) cells with WT1 expression knocked-down by shRNA still retained tamoxifen insensitivity. CONCLUSION: Our results indicated that WT1 is involved in expressional regulation of the EGFR family members and ER-α during development of acquired tamoxifen resistance.
  We sought to determine the molecular basis for the anticancer activities of 5,3'-dihydroxy-3,6,7,8,4'-pentamethoxyflavone (DH-PMF), isolated from Gardenia obtusifolia traditionally used in Thailand for a variety of ailments. As little as 1 μM DH-PMF inhibited the proliferation of prostate, colon, kidney, lung, head and neck, pancreas, breast, leukemia, and myeloma cancer cell lines. DH-PMF also suppressed the colony-forming ability of tumor cells, with 50% inhibition occurring at a dose less than 10 nM. DH-PMF induced G(2)/M and subG(1) cell cycle arrest, increased the levels of p21(WAF1/CIP1) and p27(KIP1), and reduced the expression of cyclin D1, CDC2, and c-MYC. Furthermore, DH-PMF inhibited AKT and glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK3β) activation, reduced cell survival proteins, and induced apoptosis, as indicated by annexin V staining, TUNEL assay, and activation of caspase-8, -9 and -3. Overall, our results demonstrate that DH-PMF induces suppression of cell proliferation through modulation of AKT-GSK3β pathways and induction of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitors.
  The objective of this study was to evaluate the expression of MMP-2 and MMP-9 in sentinel lymph node and serum of breast cancer patients in order to evaluate their clinical significance and usefulness as diagnostic tumour markers. Expression of MMP-2 and MMP-9 was performed on sentinel lymph node by immunohistochemistry while gelatine zymography was used to determinate the serum expression. The association of gelatinases with clinicopathological features, were analysed. Metastatic and non-metastatic breast cancer patients and 34 healthy women were involved. Gelatinases expression were significantly higher in metastatic breast cancer in comparison to non-metastatic cancer and the control group both in the sentinel lymph node and serum. Results showed a statistically significant correlation between MMP-2 or MMP-9 and cancer familiality, MMP-9 and CA 15.3 levels, and MMP-9 and grading. This study suggests a clinical utility of these proteolytic markers in malignant tumour, growth, invasion and metastasis in breast cancer.
  BACKGROUND: Aromatase inhibitor (AI) has been established as an effective endocrine therapy in estrogen receptor (ER)-positive postmenopausal breast cancer patients. Our recent proteomic analysis demonstrated that ten proteins were significantly altered in their expression levels before and after the therapy in the patients receiving neoadjuvant AI. Among these newly identified proteins, heat-shock protein 70 (HSP-70) was the most significantly correlated with both clinical and pathological responses. Therefore, in this study, we further evaluated the significance of this HSP-70 alteration using immunohistochemistry. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 32 patients treated with neoadjuvant exemestane or letrozole in whom pre- and post-treatment tumor tissues were available were included. Immunohistochemical evaluation of ER, progesterone receptor (PgR), Her-2, Ki-67 and HSP-70 was performed. Results obtained were compared to both clinical and biological responses of the patients. RESULTS: The majority of the patients responded to treatment (16 patients with partial response, 14 with stable disease and 2 with progressive disease). The means of ER, Ki-67 and HSP-70 were significantly different between treatment responders and non-responders. Decrement of HSP-70 and Ki-67 after AI treatment and pretreatment Ki-67 labeling index of >10% tumor cells were significantly associated with clinical responsiveness to AI treatment (p<0.0001). There was a significant positive correlation between changes of HSP-70 and Ki-67 before and after the therapy. CONCLUSION: Decrement of HSP-70 in breast carcinoma cells plays important roles in therapeutic mechanisms of AIs through suppressing tumor cell proliferation in breast cancer patients.
  BACKGROUND: High frequencies of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) are found in familial breast carcinomas with BRCA mutations. Although LOH of BRCA1 does not coincide with somatic BRCA1 mutations, reduced BRCA1 protein expression and hypermethylation indicate the involvement of BRCA1 in sporadic carcinogenesis. To further investigate the role of BRCA we determined LOH of BRCA1 and correlated this with LOH in other breast cancer-associated regions. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 105 sporadic breast carcinomas were analysed for LOH in the regions of BRCA1, BRCA2, TP53, Caveolin1, "putative BRCA3", PTEN, ATM and E-cadherin and correlated it with clinicopathological features. RESULTS: We found an overall increase of LOH in carcinomas with simultaneous LOH of BRCA1. Significantly higher LOH rates were detected in the regions of TP53 (80%: 34.7%; p<0.005), 8q21 (72.7%: 30.6%; p<0.010) and 10q22-23 (21.1%: 5.9%; p=0.043). Moreover, estrogen receptor-negative carcinomas revealed LOH of BRCA1 more frequently than estrogen receptor-positive carcinomas (39%: 12%; p=0.003). CONCLUSION: These data indicate that LOH of BRCA1 coincides with a defect of the DNA repair pathway. Therefore, LOH of BRCA1 determines a subgroup of sporadic breast carcinomas sharing genotype/phenotype features with familial breast carcinomas.
  BACKGROUND: Downstream signaling is a key component of Her2/neu overexpression in human breast cancer. Major survival pathways downstream of Her2/neu include mitogen and stress activated protein kinases (ERK, JNK, p38). MATERIALS AND METHODS: MAPK protein expression was examined in mouse and human cancer tissue. MAPK expression was inhibited by genetic and pharmacologic methods in human breast cancer cell lines. The effects of MAPK inhibition on tumor formation in a preclinical model were determined. RESULTS: It was shown that tumors from MMTV-neu mice expressed high levels of activated JNK1. Levels of this kinase were also highest in Her2/neu overexpressing human breast cancer cell lines. JNK1 inhibition specifically induced apoptosis in these lines. A JNK1 inhibitor also increased the latency period and decreased growth of MMTV-neu tumors by induction of apoptosis. JNK1 was preferentially activated in human breast cancer tissue overexpressing Her2/neu. CONCLUSION: JNK1 promotes cell survival in Her2/neu-positive breast cancer.
  Aim: Sulforaphane (SFN), which is present in cruciferous vegetables, induces growth arrest and/or cell death in cancer of various organs. The involvement of autophagy in the SFN-induced apoptotic death of human breast cancer cells was investigated. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Cell proliferation and viability was assessed by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay and trypan blue exclusion assay. Flow cytometry, immunofluorescence, electron microscopy, and Western blot analysis were used for detection of apoptosis and autophagy, and the role of autophagy was assessed using autophagy inhibitors. RESULTS: SFN dose- and time-dependently retarded the growth and induced cell death in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells. In MDA-MB-231 cells, 30 μM SFN caused S and G(2)/M cell-cycle arrest associated with increased p21(WAF1) and p27(KIP1) levels and decreased cyclin A, cyclin B1 and CDC2 levels. Cell death was due to apoptosis with increased caspase-3 and lowered BCL-2 levels. In addition, the SFN-treated cells exhibited autophagy, as characterized by the appearance of autophagic vacuoles by electron microscopy, the accumulation of acidic vesicular organelles by flow cytometry, and the punctuate patterns of microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 (LC3) by fluorescein microscopy. The levels of LC3-I and -II proteins (processed forms of LC3-I) and LC3 mRNA were increased. Treatment with autophagy inhibitor bafilomycin A1 (but not 3-methyladenine) with SFN significantly enhanced apoptosis, which was accompanied by increases in the level of BAX and the cleavage of caspase-3 and poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase (PARP)-1 and decreases in the mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm). CONCLUSION: These results indicate a cytoprotective role of autophagy against SFN-induced apoptosis and that the combination of SFN treatment with autophagy inhibition may be a promising strategy for breast cancer control.
  BACKGROUND: SET domain containing protein 2 (SETD2) is a histone methyltransferase that is involved in transcriptional elongation. We previously demonstrated SETD2 to be a potential tumour suppressor gene in breast cancer. The aim of this study was to compare SETD2 expression in breast cancer with that in adjacent non-cancerous breast tissue (ANCT) in paired samples. A hypothesis is proposed that explains the mode of action of SETD2 as a tumour suppressor gene. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Paired samples of tumour and adjacent non-cancerous tissue (ANCT) from 25 patients were analysed. The levels of transcription of SETD2 were determined using quantitative polymerase chain reaction and normalized against cytokeratin 19. Immunohistochemical staining with appropriate antibodies against SETD2 protein was also performed in selected samples. RESULTS: Levels of SETD2 mRNA were significantly higher in ANCT when compared to those in tumour samples (p=0.01). Immunohistochemistry also demonstrated a higher protein expression in ANCT. CONCLUSION: This study offers further evidence that SETD2 behaves like a tumour suppressor gene. Our hypothesis links SETD2 mode of action with telomerase regulation through human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT). Several studies have emphasised the importance of histone methylation of hTERT promotor in telomerase regulation. SETD2 function of histone methylation could be the missing link in this chain which could explain the potential tumour suppressor function of SETD2.
  PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog) loss of function is the most common genetic aberration in endometrioid endometrial carcinomas. In addition to its well-described role in cell signaling, PTEN is involved in the maintenance of genomic stability. Loss of PTEN function causes defects in repair of DNA double-strand breaks by homologous recombination and, therefore, sensitizes cells to inhibition of the poly(adenosine diphosphate ribose) polymerase (PARP). Here, we determined the PTEN status of eight endometrioid endometrial carcinoma cell lines and correlated it with in vitro sensitivity to the PARP inhibitor KU0058948. PTEN-deficient cells showed a significantly greater sensitivity to KU0058948 than the two endometrioid endometrial carcinoma cell lines with wild-type PTEN. The cell lines lacking PTEN expression were unable to elicit a homologous recombination damage response as assayed by RAD51 focus function (a marker of competent homologous recombination DNA repair) upon irradiation and treatment with PARP inhibitors. PTEN silencing in PTEN wild-type Hec-1b cells resulted in reduced RAD51 foci formation after DNA damage and increased sensitivity to PARP inhibition. PTEN reexpression in PTEN-null cell lines resulted in enhanced RAD51 foci formation and in relative resistance to KU0058948. Given that up to 80% of endometrioid endometrial cancers lack PTEN expression, our results suggest that PARP inhibitors may be therapeutically useful for a subset of endometrioid endometrial cancers.
  BACKGROUND: About 20% of women with ovarian cancer have low to typical concentrations of serum carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA125), and this important tumor marker cannot be used to monitor their disease. The measured concentration for mucin 1 (MUC1), or CA15-3, another tumor marker, can be lowered in breast and ovarian cancer patients when circulating immune complexes (CICs) containing antibodies bound to the free antigen are present. Because CA125 and MUC1 are related members of the mucin family, we sought to determine whether CICs might also exist for CA125 and interfere with its clinical assay. METHODS: We developed an antigen capture- based assay to determine the presence of CICs for CA125. We spotted mouse antibodies to CA125 onto nanoparticle slides, incubated them with patient serum, and added Cy5-tagged goat antihuman IgG antibodies. Fluorescence intensities were read and normalized to the intensities for glutathione S-transferase A1 as a control. RESULTS: Assay results for 23 ovarian cancer cases with high CA125 concentrations, 43 cases with low CA125 concentrations, and 19 controls (mean CA125 concentrations, 2706, 23, and 11 kilounits/L, respectively) revealed mean fluorescence intensities for CA125 CIC of 2.30, 2.72, and 1.99 intensity units (iu), respectively. A generalized linear model adjusted for batch and age showed higher CA125 CIC fluorescence intensities in low-CA125 cases than in high-CA125 cases (P = 0.03) and controls (P = 0.0005). Four ovarian cancer patients who had recurrent disease and always had typical CA125 values had a mean CA125 CIC value of 3.06 iu (95% CI, 2.34-4.01 iu). CONCLUSIONS: These preliminary results suggest the existence of CICs involving CA125, which may help explain some ovarian cancer cases with typical CA125 concentrations.
  Estrogen action, via both nuclear and extranuclear estrogen receptors (ERs), induces a variety of cellular signals that are prosurvival or proliferative, whereas nitric oxide (NO) can inhibit apoptosis via caspase S-nitrosylation and via activation of soluble guanylyl cyclase to produce cGMP. The action of 17β-estradiol (E2) at ER is known to elicit NO signaling via activation of NO synthase (NOS) in many tissues. The MCF-10A nontumorigenic, mammary epithelial cell line is genetically stable and insensitive to estrogenic proliferation. In this cell line, estrogens or NOS inhibitors alone had no significant effect, whereas in combination, apoptosis was induced rapidly in the absence of serum; the presence of inducible NOS was confirmed by proteomic analysis. The application of pharmacological agents determined that apoptosis was dependent upon NO/cGMP signaling via cyclic GMP (cGMP)-dependent protein kinase and could be replicated by inhibition of the phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase/serine-threonine kinase pathway prior to addition of E2. Apoptosis was confirmed by nuclear staining and increased caspase-3 activity in E2 + NOS inhibitor-treated cells. Apoptosis was partially inhibited by a pure ER antagonist and replicated by agonists selective for extranuclear ER. Cells were rescued from E2-induced apoptosis after NOS blockade, by NO-donors and cGMP pathway agonists; preincubation with NO donors was required. The NOS and ER status of breast cancer tissues is significant in etiology, prognosis, and therapy. In this study, apoptosis of preneoplastic mammary epithelial cells was triggered by estrogens via a rapid, extranuclear ER-mediated response, after removal of an antiapoptotic NO/cGMP/cGMP-dependent protein kinase signal.
  The HER family of receptors consists of four closely related type 1 transmembrane TK receptors: HER1 (EGFR), HER2, HER3 and HER4. Signalling via the HER family of receptors underpins the majority of the intricate array of cellular activities on which cell survival and functionality depend. Aberrant HER2 expression and/or functionality have been implicated in the evolution of breast cancer and this receptor has proved to be a potent target for anticancer therapies, including antibody-based therapies to prevent ligand binding, dimer formation or the recruitment of antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity, and direct kinase inhibition to prevent molecular activation and recruitment of downstream signalling partners. Novel strategies against HER2 include HER tyrosine kinase inhibitors, HSP90 inhibitors and antibody-chemotherapy conjugates. This latter approach is exemplified by T-DM1, a potent antibody that has a good safety profile and that has shown remarkable activity in patients with advanced disease. In addition, pertuzumab, an mAb that directly inhibits the formation of HER2 dimers including the HER2:HER3 dimer, offers a unique mechanism of HER3 inhibition. All these approaches have shown substantial clinical activity in patients refractory to trastuzumab. It is anticipated that with the increased availability of novel anti-HER2 agents together with a better understanding of the mechanisms of resistance to anti-HER2 agents we should be able to further improve the outcome of patients with HER2 breast cancer. There will also be an increasing tendency towards moving the study of these agents to earlier stages of the disease, namely in the adjuvant and neoadjuvant setting.
  Since the identification of BRCA 1 and 2 in 1995, testing for mutations in these genes has been offered to cancer patients and their families by clinical genetics services. These services are provided across Europe by a small number of health professionals, and are therefore low volume, and low capacity and patients experience considerable delays, both in seeing a clinician and in laboratory testing. The UK private sector, driven by consumer demand and professional competition, has significantly reduced these delays. The development of a new class of therapeutic agent, the PARP inhibitors, is likely to drive the BRCA testing services towards the UK private sector model with much faster turnaround times. Several new genetic tests are now available including CYP 2D6 genotype analysis and the BCtect test. The clinical interpretation of these tests is complex, and the professional community has been naturally cautious about adopting new tests in clinical care. This article will examine the consequences of expected changes in BRCA testing practice, and consider the positioning of new tests in the patient pathway, and the messages given by health professionals.
  Triple-negative [estrogen receptor (ER)-/progesterone receptor (PR)-/HER2-] breast cancers account for ∼15% of overall breast cancers. Triple-negative breast cancers demonstrate a panel of specific molecular alterations including a high rate of p53 mutations, frequent loss of function of BRCA1, phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) loss and a specific panel of tyrosine kinase activation [fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2)]. This molecular entity is considered as sensitive to chemotherapy in the adjuvant setting. When metastatic, the disease is usually aggressive and drug resistant, leading to cancer death within 18 months for the majority of patients. There is no evidence from randomized trials that triple-negative breast cancers have a different sensitivity to specific chemotherapy compared with other molecular classes. Similar findings have been reported for bevacizumab. Several recent research efforts have focused on this entity in the last few years. DNA alkylating agents have shown promising activity in the neoadjuvant setting, but no evidence from a phase III trial currently supports its use. Several targeted therapies are also being successfully developed. Poly(ADP ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) inhibitors induce tumor response as a single agent in BRCA1-mutated breast cancer, and could sensitize cisplatin in the whole triple negative population. Several other targeted agents are being developed in this setting, including epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), FGFR2, mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and NOTCH inhibitors.
  Cancer treatment-induced bone loss (CTIBL) is generally more rapid and severe than bone loss associated with menopause in women or ageing in men and women. In premenopausal women with breast cancer, CTIBL is mainly caused by chemotherapy with resultant ovarian failure, by GnRH agonists or by tamoxifen. In postmenopausal women, steroidal and non-steroidal aromatase inhibitors (AIs) increase bone turnover, decrease bone mass and increase fracture rate (hazard ratio increased to 1.38-1.55 compared with tamoxifen). Zoledronic acid can prevent bone loss in premenopausal women receiving adjuvant therapy with goserelin in combination with either anastrozole or tamoxifen and in postmenopausal women receiving AIs. Denosumab has been shown in a placebo-controlled study to significantly increase bone mineral density in postmenopausal women under AIs. More limited studies indicate that oral bisphosphonates used at licensed doses for the treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis can also prevent AI-induced bone loss. In prostate cancer, bone loss that occurs with androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) also leads to an increased fracture rate. The bisphosphonates pamidronate and alendronate can prevent bone loss whereas zoledronic acid can increase bone mass under ADT. As for breast cancer, delay in bisphosphonate therapy is detrimental to bone health. The protective effects of denosumab on bone loss and incidental vertebral fractures have been demonstrated in a 3-year placebo-controlled trial.
  The prognosis of pT1N0M0/stage I breast cancer has generally been considered so favourable that these patients are not routinely offered adjuvant systemic therapy. However, biological heterogeneity within pT1N0M0 dictates diverse outcomes within the subgroup. HER2 gene amplification or protein overexpression is uncommon in pT1N0M0 disease, but, when present, is clearly associated with a higher risk of recurrence. The role of anti-HER2 therapy in these patients is controversial. Few women with node-negative, small tumours were included in the adjuvant trastuzumab trials. There are no robust data on trastuzumab in this patient subset, although subgroup analyses suggest that proportional benefits are independent of T and N. With current guidelines and scheduling, committing to adjuvant trastuzumab involves concurrent chemotherapy, 1 year of treatment and potential cardiotoxicity. A further challenge with anti-HER2 therapy is the potential benefit in patients with demonstrable HER2 positivity within a predominantly HER2-negative tumour. The decision for therapy requires a yes/no answer, but HER2 status derives from a continuum of gene copy number and protein expression. The diagnostic threshold is made more complex by heterogeneity of the HER2 status within a tumour. This review focuses on available data for HER2-positive pT1N0M0 disease and explores the significance of intratumoural HER2 heterogeneity.
  Endocrine-responsive tumors that are small and without nodal involvement (i.e. tumors classified as pT1 pN0) are a heterogeneous group of tumors that are associated with a low risk of relapse in the majority of the cases. Therefore, the costs and benefits of adjuvant endocrine therapy should be carefully considered within this subgroup of patients. Treatment decisions should take into consideration co-morbidities as well as the presence of other classical risk factors such as HER2 overexpression or extensive peritumoral vascular invasion. Tamoxifen or tamoxifen plus ovarian function suppression should be considered as proper endocrine therapies in premenopausal patients. Ovarian function suppression alone or ovarian ablation might also be considered adequate in selected patients (e.g. very low-risk patients, in the presence of co-morbidities or patient preference). An aromatase inhibitor should form part of standard endocrine therapy for most postmenopausal women with receptor-positive breast cancer, although patients at low risk or with co-morbid musculoskeletal or cardiovascular risk factors may be considered suitable for tamoxifen alone. Tailored endocrine treatments should be considered in patients with endocrine-responsive tumors classified as pT1 pN0. Issues focusing on safety, quality of life and subjective side effects should be routinely discussed.
  Breast cancer is a complex disease and even at a favourable stage, such as the pT1N0 one, it is unlikely to be understood and cured by focusing only on single gene or protein alterations determined with suboptimal technologies, as the standard clinico-pathological predictors are. Improving breast cancer treatment will require a more systematic, structured and multidimensional approach able to integrate tumour biology, disease burden and host-related factors. In this scenario, multigene predictors capturing gene-expression profiling or other molecular measurements have great potential for improving breast cancer management. Nevertheless, even if the gene signatures generated so far clearly represent a step forward in the prediction of patient outcome, they are still showing some limitations that nowadays are the basis for the development of a second generation of multigene predictors. Their strength will stand in the investigation of the tumour-surrounding stroma and tumour microenvironment, in the interrogation of different molecular subtypes of breast cancer as distinct entities and in the ability to predict both early and late relapse. It is prospected that the greater accuracy of this new wave of predictors will provide substantial support to the existing decision tools and will significantly ameliorate our current ability to define breast cancer prognosis.
  BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is less common in China than in the United States and perinatal characteristics predict breast cancer risk in the offspring. We determined levels of pregnancy hormones in Boston and Shanghai to identify those possibly involved in the intrauterine origin of breast cancer. Participants and methods: We compared maternal and cord blood levels of estradiol, estriol, testosterone, progesterone, prolactin, insulin-like growth factors (IGF) 1 and 2, insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 3, adiponectin and sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) in 241 Caucasian and 295 Chinese women. Results: In both centers, hormone levels at the 16th were predictive of those at the 27th gestational week, but there was little correlation between maternal and cord blood levels. In cord blood, we found significantly (P < 0.01) higher levels of estradiol (44.2%), testosterone (54.5%), IGF-2 (22.7%) and strikingly SHBG (104.6%) in Shanghai women, whereas the opposite was true for IGF-1 (-36.8%). Conclusions: Taking into account the current understanding of the plausible biological role of the examined endocrine factors, those likely to be involved in the intrauterine origin of breast cancer are SHBG and IGF-2, with higher cord blood levels among Chinese, and IGF-1, with higher cord blood levels among Caucasian women.
  Tocotrienols are vitamin E members with potent antiproliferative activity against preneoplastic and neoplastic mammary epithelial cells with little or no effect on normal cell growth or functions. However, physicochemical and pharmacokinetic properties greatly limit their use as therapeutic agents. Tocotrienols' chemical instability, poor water solubility, NPC1L1-mediated transport, and rapid metabolism are examples of such obstacles which hinder the therapeutic use of these valuable natural products. Vitamin E esters like α-tocopheryl succinate were prepared to significantly improve chemical and metabolic stability, water solubility, and potency. Thus, 12 semisynthetic tocotrienol ester analogues 4-15 were prepared by direct esterification of natural tocotrienol isomers with various acid anhydrides or chlorides. Esters 4-15 were evaluated for their ability to inhibit the proliferation and migration of the mammary tumor cells +SA and MDA-MB-231, respectively. Esters 5, 9, and 11 effectively inhibited the proliferation of the highly metastatic +SA rodent mammary epithelial cells with IC(50) values of 0.62, 0.51, and 0.86μM, respectively, at doses that had no effect on immortalized normal mouse CL-S1 mammary epithelial cells. Esters 4, 6, 8-10, and 13 inhibited 50% of the migration of the human metastatic MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells at a single 5μM dose in wound-healing assay. The most active ester 9 was 1000-fold more water-soluble and chemically stable versus its parent α-tocotrienol (1). These findings strongly suggest that redox-silent tocotrienol esters may provide superior therapeutic forms of tocotrienols for the control of metastatic breast cancer.
  INTRODUCTION: We investigated survival in breast cancer patients by age group, focussing on those covered by screening programmes, using data from 12 European population-based cancer registries participating in the European Network for Indicators on Cancer Survival Working Group. METHODS: We calculated period estimates of 5-year relative survival for 2000-2004 and examined the change in survival estimates for four age groups between 1990-1994 and 2000-2004. Trends in age specific incidence, survival and mortality were additionally compared to those in the United States based on results from the Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) programme. RESULTS: Breast cancer survival uniformly increased particularly in areas with lower breast cancer survival for patients diagnosed in 1990-1994. With the exception of Geneva, Scotland and Estonia, the rise in survival was always larger among the younger age groups than in the 70+ age group and the age-gradient widened over time. The 5-year relative survival of patients aged 70 and above in the European registries was at least 7 percentage points lower than the 5-year relative survival of patients in the same age group in the US in 2000-2004. During the study period, incidence increased in all age groups and populations with a few exceptions, an observation paralleled by declining mortality. CONCLUSIONS: Results showed that some of the geographical differences in overall survival are even larger when considering age groups, in particular between Western and Eastern European countries. Furthermore, some of the differences in survival within the Northern and Western European areas could be due to variations in the implementation of screening programmes rather than economic inequalities.
  Grifolin, a secondary metabolite isolated from the fresh fruiting bodies of the mushroom Albatrellus confluens, has been shown to inhibit the growth of some cancer cell lines in vitro by induction of apoptosis in previous studies of our group. However, the mechanisms of action are not completely understood. An apoptosis-related gene expression profiling analysis provided a clue that death-associated protein kinase 1 (dapk1) gene was upregulated at least twofold in response to grifolin treatment in nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell CNE1. Here, we further investigated the role of DAPK1 in apoptotic effect induced by grifolin. We observed that protein as well as mRNA level of DAPK1 was induced by grifolin in a dose-dependent manner in nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell CNE1. We found that grifolin increased both Ser392 and Ser20 phosphorylation levels of transcription factor p53 protein, which could promote its transcriptional activity. Moreover, induced by grifolin, the recruitment of p53 to dapk1 gene promoter was confirmed to enhance markedly using EMSA and ChIP assays analysis. The involvement of DAPK1 in grifolin-induced apoptosis was supported by the studies that introducing siRNA targeting DAPK1 to CNE1 cells remarkably interfered grifolin-caused apoptotic effect as well as the activation of caspase-3. Grifolin induced upregulation of DAPK1 via p53 was also observed in tumour cells derived from human breast cancer and human colon cancer. The findings suggest that upregulation of DAPK1 via p53-DAPK1 pathway is an important mechanism of grifolin contributing to its ability to induce apoptotic effect. Since growing evidence found a significant loss of DAPK1 expression in a large variety of tumour types, grifolin may represent a promising candidate in the intervention of cancer via targeting DAPK1.
  BACKGROUND: Due to the rising trend of delaying pregnancy to later in life, more women are diagnosed with breast cancer before completing their families. Therefore, enquiry into the feasibility and safety of pregnancy following breast cancer diagnosis is on the rise. Available evidence suggests that women with a history of breast cancer are frequently advised against future conception for fear that pregnancy could adversely affect their breast cancer outcome. Hence, we conducted a meta-analysis to understand the effect of pregnancy on overall survival of women with a history of breast cancer. METHODS: Two of the authors independently performed a literature search up to September 2009 with no language restrictions. Eligible studies were published retrospective control-matched, population-based and hospital-based studies that have addressed the impact of pregnancy on the overall survival of women with history of breast cancer. Pooling of data was done using the random effect model. Unpublished statistics from three studies were obtained to perform further subgroup and sensitivity analyses. This included examining the effect of pregnancy according to age at diagnosis, healthy mother effect, type of study, nodal status and other parameters. RESULTS: Fourteen studies were included in this meta-analysis (1244 cases and 18,145 controls). Women who got pregnant following breast cancer diagnosis had a 41% reduced risk of death compared to women who did not get pregnant [PRR: 0.59 (90% confidence interval (CI): 0.50-0.70)]. This difference was seen irrespective of the type of the study and particularly in women with history of node-negative disease. In a subgroup analysis, we compared the outcome of women with history of breast cancer who became pregnant to breast cancer patients who did not get pregnant and were known to be free of relapse. In this analysis, we did not find significant differences in survival between either group [PRR: 0.85; 95% CI: 0.53-1.35]. CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms that pregnancy in women with history of breast cancer is safe and does not compromise their overall survival. Hence, breast cancer survivors should not be denied the opportunity of future conception.
  BACKGROUND: Depression and anxiety are common after diagnosis of breast cancer. We examined to what extent these are recurrences of previous disorder and, controlling for this, whether shame, self-blame and low social support after diagnosis predicted onset of depression and anxiety subsequently.MethodWomen with primary breast cancer who had been treated surgically self-reported shame, self-blame, social support and emotional distress post-operatively. Psychiatric interview 12 months later identified those with adult lifetime episodes of major depression (MD) or generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) before diagnosis and onset over the subsequent year. Statistical analysis examined predictors of each disorder in that year. RESULTS: Of the patients, two-thirds with episodes of MD and 40% with episodes of GAD during the year after diagnosis were experiencing recurrence of previous disorder. Although low social support, self-blame and shame were each associated with both MD and GAD after diagnosis, they did not mediate the relationship of disorder after diagnosis with previous disorder. Low social support, but not shame or self-blame, predicted recurrence after controlling for previous disorder. CONCLUSIONS: Anxiety and depression during the first year after diagnosis of breast cancer are often the recurrence of previous disorder. In predicting disorder following diagnosis, self-blame and shame are merely markers of previous disorder. Low social support is an independent predictor and therefore may have a causal role.
  BACKGROUND: Here we present the first paired-end sequencing of tumors from genetically engineered mouse models of cancer to determine how faithfully these models recapitulate the landscape of somatic rearrangements found in human tumors. These were models of Trp53-mutated breast cancer, Brca1- and Brca2-associated hereditary breast cancer, and E-cadherin (Cdh1) mutated lobular breast cancer. RESULTS: We show that although Brca1- and Brca2-deficient mouse mammary tumors have a defect in the homologous recombination pathway there is no apparent difference in the type or frequency of somatic rearrangements found in these cancers when compared to other mouse mammary cancers, and tumors from all genetic backgrounds showed evidence of micro-homology mediated repair and non-homologous end-joining processes. Importantly mouse mammary tumors were found to carry fewer structural rearrangements than human mammary cancers and expressed in-frame fusion genes. Like the fusion genes found in human mammary tumors these were not recurrent. One mouse tumor was found to contain an internal deletion of exons of the Lrp1b gene, which lead to a smaller in-frame transcript. We found internal in-frame deletions in the human ortholog of this gene in a significant number (4.2%) of human cancer cell lines. CONCLUSIONS: Paired-end sequencing of mouse mammary tumors revealed that they display significant heterogeneity in their profiles of somatic rearrangement, but importantly fewer rearrangements than cognate human mammary tumors, probably because these cancers have been induced by strong driver mutations engineered into the mouse genome. Both human and mouse mammary cancers carry expressed fusion genes and conserved homozygous deletions.
  The T-box transcription factor, TBX3, provides an important link between embryonic development and cancer. TBX3 mediates limb, mammary gland and heart development and in humans, mutations resulting in haploinsufficiency of TBX3 lead to the ulnar-mammary syndrome. Importantly, the de-regulation of TBX3 gene expression has been linked to several cancers where it acts to suppress senescence, and promotes proliferation and tumour invasion. Despite the negative impact of de-regulated TBX3 expression as seen by developmental defects and cancer, surprisingly little is known about the regulation of the TBX3 gene. Here we show that the phorbol ester 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) induces TBX3 protein and mRNA levels in a PKC-dependent manner via the activator protein 1 (AP-1) transcription factors c-Jun and JunB. Furthermore, these AP-1 factors are shown to mediate the activation of the TBX3 gene by binding a non-consensus TPA-response element in the TBX3 promoter in vitro and in vivo. We also demonstrate that TBX3 contributes to the TPA-induced migration previously observed for the MCF-7 breast epithelium cancer cell line. Our data reveal a previously unidentified pathway that upregulates TBX3 expression and provides additional evidence that increased levels of TBX3 contributes to metastasis.
  Background: Supplemental screening ultrasonography (US) in addition to mammography can help detect early breast cancers in women with dense breasts and other risk factors. It is crucial to understand the imaging features of US-detected cancer to identify them in screening population. Purpose: To retrospectively evaluate the US features and final assessments of breast cancers detected by supplemental screening US in comparison with cancers seen on screening mammography. Material and Methods: The study included 80 women (mean age 46 years, range 31&#x2013;65 years) with 80 breast cancers detected by supplemental screening US. Another 80 women (mean age 52 years, range 33&#x2013;77 years) with 80 breast cancers seen on screening mammography were included for a control group. US features and final assessments were classified according to the Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS) without knowledge of the method of detection, or mammographic or histologic findings. Results of the two groups were compared. Results: Breast cancers detected by supplemental screening US were more frequently found to have the following features: an oval shape (21% [17/80] vs 10% [8/80], P = 0.013), a circumscribed margin (13% [10/80] vs 4% [3/80], P = 0.043), an abrupt interface (79% [63/80] vs 53% [42/80], P &lt; 0.001), and no posterior acoustic (70% [56/80] vs 53% [42/80], P = 0.023) or surrounding tissue (79% [63/80] vs 28% [22/80], P &lt; 0.001) changes. For the final assessment, 93% (74/80) of US-detected cancers and 60% (48/80) of cancers seen on mammography were classified as a category 4, while 3% (2/80) of US-detected cancers and 38% (30/80) of cancers seen on mammography were category 5. Conclusion: Compared with breast cancers seen on screening mammography, breast cancers detected by supplemental screening US tend to have less malignant US features, although most (95%) of them were classified as category 4 or 5.
  Background: Studies comparing analog and digital mammography in breast cancer screening have shown conflicting results. Little is known about the use of digital photon-counting detectors. Purpose: To retrospectively compare performance indicators in screen-film (SFM) and full-field digital mammography (FFDM) using a photon-counting detector in a population-based screening program. Material and Methods: The Norwegian Social Science Data Services approved the study, which was part of the Norwegian Breast Cancer Screening Program. The program invites women aged 50&#x2013;69 years to two-view mammography biannually. The study period was January 2005 to June 2006 for SFM and August 2006 to December 2007 for FFDM. Independent double reading was performed using a five-point rating scale for probability of cancer. Recalls due to abnormal mammography were retrospectively reviewed by an expert panel. Performance indicators for the two techniques were compared. Attendance rate was 83.6% (7442/8901) for SFM and 82.0% (6932/8451) for FFDM. Results: The recall rate due to abnormal mammography, cancer detection rate and positive predictive value did not differ significantly between SFM and FFDM: recall 2.3% (174/7442) versus 2.4% (168/6932), cancer detection 0.39% (29/7442) versus 0.48% (33/6932), positive predictive value 16.7% (29/174) versus 19.6% (33/168), respectively (P&gt;0.05 for all). The recall rate due to technically inadequate mammograms was 0.3% (19/7442) for SFM and 0.01% (1/6932) for FFDM. In the retrospective review, a significantly higher proportion of calcifications and asymmetric density were categorized as normal or definitively benign in FFDM compared with SFM. The average glandular dose was 2.17 mGy for SFM and 1.25 mGy for FFDM. Conclusion: Performance indicators show that FFDM using photon-counting detector is suitable for breast cancer screening. The lower radiation dose and lower recalls due to technically inadequate mammograms are of importance in mammography screening.
  Polypurine Reverse-Hoogsteen hairpins, PPRHs, are dsDNA molecules formed by two polypurine stretches linked by a pentathymidine loop, with intramolecular Reverse-Hoogsteen bonds that allow a hairpin structure. PPRHs bind to polypyrimidine targets by Watson-Crick bonds maintaining simultaneously a hairpin structure due to intramolecular Hoogsteen bonds. Previously, we described the ability of Template-PPRHs to decrease mRNA levels since these PPRHs target the template DNA strand interfering with the transcription process. Now, we designed Coding-PPRHs, a new type of PPRHs that directly target the pre-mRNA. The dihydrofolate reductase gene, dhfr, was selected as a target in breast cancer therapy. These PPRHs caused a high degree of cytotoxicity and a decrease in DHFR mRNA and protein levels, but by a different mechanism of action than Template-PPRH. Coding-PPRHs interfere with the splicing process by competing with U2AF65 for binding to the polypyrimidine target sequence, leading to a lower amount of mature mRNA. These new PPRHs showed high specificity as no off-target effects were found. The application of these molecules as therapeutic tools was tested in breast cancer cells resistant to methotrexate obtaining a noticeable cytotoxicity even though the dhfr locus was amplified. Coding-PPRHs can be considered as new molecules to decrease gene expression at the mRNA level, and an alternative to other antisense molecules.
  Multi-drug resistant (MDR) cancer is a significant clinical obstacle and is often implicated in cases of recurrent, non-responsive disease. Targeted nanoparticles were made by synthesizing a poly(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide)/poly(ethylene glycol)/epidermal growth factor receptor targeting peptide (PLGA/PEG/EGFR-peptide) construct for incorporation in poly(epsilon-caprolactone) (PCL) nanoparticles. MDR was induced in a panel of nine human breast and ovarian cancer cell lines using hypoxia. EGFR-targeted polymer blend nanoparticles were shown to actively target EGFR over-expressing cell lines, especially upon induction of hypoxia. The nanoparticles were capable of sustained drug release. Combination therapy with lonidamine and paclitaxel significantly improved the therapeutic index of both drugs. Treatment with a nanoparticle dose of 1 µM paclitaxel/10 µM lonidamine resulted in less than 10% cell viability for all hypoxic/MDR cell lines and less than 5% cell viability for all normoxic cell lines. Comparatively, treatment with 1 µM paclitaxel alone was the approximate IC50 value of the MDR cells while treatment with lonidamine alone had very little effect. PLGA/PEG/EGFR-peptide delivery system actively targets a MDR cell by exploiting the expression of EGFR. This system treats MDR by inhibiting the Warburg effect and promoting mitochondrial binding of pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 proteins (lonidamine), while hyperstabilizing microtubules (paclitaxel). This nanocarrier system actively targets a MDR associated phenotype (EGFR receptor over-expression), further enhancing the therapeutic index of both drugs and potentiating the use of lonidamine/paclitaxel combination therapy in the treatment of MDR cancer.
  People with schizophrenia are more likely to die prematurely than the general population from both suicide and physical ill health. Published studies examining the incidence of cancer in schizophrenia patients report increased, reduced or similar incidence compared with the general population. Older studies tended to report lower incidence rates which fuelled speculation as to the biological and other mechanisms for this protective effect. Furthermore, mortality rates in patients with schizophrenia appear higher than expected. We undertook a non-systematic review of published data to give an overview for these variable findings and illustrate methodological confounders by highlighting a systematic review of breast cancer studies.
  BACKGROUND: The rise in Internet use for seeking health information raises questions about the role the Internet may play in how patients make medical decisions. OBJECTIVE: To examine Internet use and perceived importance of different sources of information by patients making 9 specific medical decisions covering prescription medication initiation, cancer screening, and elective surgery. SETTING: National sample of US adults identified by random-digit dialing. DESIGN: Cross-sectional survey conducted between November 2006 and May 2007. PARTICIPANTS: The final sample comprised 2575 English-speaking US adults aged 40 y and older who had either undergone 1 of 9 medical procedures or tests or talked with a health care provider about doing so during the previous 2 y. MEASUREMENTS: Participants indicated if they or other family members used the Internet to seek information related to each of the specific medical decisions and rated how important the health care provider, the Internet (if used), family and friends, and the media (newspapers, magazines, and television) were in providing information to help make the medical decision. RESULTS: Use of the Internet for information related to specific decisions among adults 40 y and older was generally low (28%) but varied across decisions, from 17% for breast cancer screening to 48% for hip/knee replacement. Internet use was higher at younger ages, rising from 14% among those aged 70 y and older to 38% for those aged 40 to 49 y. Internet users consistently rated health care providers as the most influential source of information for medical decisions, followed by the Internet, family and friends, and media. LIMITATIONS: Telephone surveys are limited by coverage and nonresponse. The authors excluded health-related Internet use not associated with the 9 target decisions. CONCLUSIONS: A minority of patients reported using the Internet to make specific common medical decisions, but use varied widely by type of decision. Perhaps reflecting perceived risk and uncertainty, use was lowest for screening decisions and highest for surgical decisions.
  BACKGROUND: Health behavior theories suggest that high perceived risk for cancer will be associated with screening, but few studies have examined how perceived risk relates to the screening decision process. OBJECTIVE: To examine relationships between perceived risk of cancer and behaviors during decision making for 3 screening tests. DESIGN: Cross-sectional survey conducted between November 2006 and May 2007. SETTING: Nationwide random-digit dial telephone survey. PARTICIPANTS: A total of 1729 English-speaking US adults aged 40 y and older who reported making a cancer screening decision (about breast, colon, or prostate tests) in the previous 2 y. MEASUREMENTS: Participants completed measures of perceived risk, information seeking, and shared decision-making tendencies. RESULTS: As perceived risk for cancer increased, patients were more likely to seek information about screening on their own (e.g., 35% of participants who perceived a high risk of cancer searched the Internet compared with 18% for those who perceived a low risk, P < 0.001) and in interactions with their physicians. As perceived risk increased, patients were also more likely to consult with more than 1 provider. Gender moderated the shared decision-making preference such that men with high perceived risks were more likely than women with high perceived risks to report they would have preferred more involvement in the decision (35% v. 9%, P = 0.001). LIMITATIONS: Cross-sectional data limit causal inferences. CONCLUSIONS: Higher perceived risk was associated with greater patient participation, as shown by more information seeking and greater desire for decisional involvement (moderated by gender). The results suggest that perceived risk of cancer could influence patient behavior when deciding about screening.
  BACKGROUND: Although many researchers have examined patient involvement and patient-provider interactions within specific clinical environments, no nationally representative data exist to characterize patient perceptions of decision making and patient-provider communications across multiple common medical decisions. OBJECTIVE: To identify deficits and variations in the patient experience of making common medical decisions about initiation of prescription medications for hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, or depression; screening tests for colorectal, breast, or prostate cancer; and surgeries for knee or hip replacement, cataracts, or lower back pain, as well as to identify factors associated with patient confidence in the decisions. SETTING: National sample of US adults identified by random-digit dialing. DESIGN: Cross-sectional survey conducted from November 2006 to May 2007. PARTICIPANTS: Included 2473 English-speaking adults age 40 and older who reported undertaking 1 or more of the above 9 medical actions or discussing doing so with a health care provider within the past 2 years. MEASUREMENTS: Patients reported who initiated discussions and made the final decisions, how much discussion of pros and cons occurred, whether they were asked about their preferences, and their confidence that the decision "was the right one." RESULTS: The proportion of patient-driven decisions varied significantly across decisions (range: blood pressure: 16% to knee/hip replacement: 48%). Most patients (78%-85%) reported that providers made a recommendation, and such recommendations generally favored taking medical action. Fewer patients reported that providers asked them about their preferences (range: colon cancer screening: 34% to knee/hip replacement: 80%) or discussed reasons not to take action (range: breast cancer screening: 20% to lower back surgery: 80%). Decision confidence was higher among patients who reported primarily making the decision themselves (odds ratio [OR] = 14.6, P < 0.001) or having been asked for their preference (OR = 1.32, P < 0.01) and was lower among patients whose patient-provider discussions included cons (OR = 0.74, P = 0.008). LIMITATIONS: Recall biases may affect patients' memories of their decision-making processes. CONCLUSIONS: DECISIONS participants reported wide variations in the proportion of discussions that included a conversation about reasons not to take action or a conversation about patients' preferences about what they would like to do. These factors appear directly related to patients' confidence that the decision was "right."
  BACKGROUND: Patients should understand the risks and benefits of cancer screening in order to make informed screening decisions. OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the extent of informed decision making in patient-provider discussions for colorectal (CRC), breast (BrCa), and prostate (PCa) cancer screening. SETTING: National sample of US adults identified by random-digit dialing. DESIGN: Cross-sectional survey conducted between November 2006 and May 2007. PARTICIPANTS: English-speaking US adults aged 50 y and older who had discussed cancer screening with a health care provider within the previous 2 y. MEASUREMENTS: Cancer screening survey modules that asked about demographic characteristics, cancer knowledge, the importance of various sources of information, and self-reported cancer screening decision-making processes. RESULTS: Overall, 1082 participants completed 1 or more of the 3 cancer modules. Although participants generally considered themselves well informed about screening tests, half or more could not correctly answer even 1 open-ended knowledge question for any given module. Participants consistently overestimated risks for being diagnosed with and dying from each cancer and overestimated the positive predictive values of prostate-specific antigen tests and mammography. Providers were the most highly rated information source, usually initiated screening discussions (64%-84%), and often recommended screening (73%-90%). However, participants reported that providers elicited their screening preferences in only 31% (CRC women) to 57% (PCa) of discussions. Although more than 90% of the discussions addressed the pros of screening, only 19% (BrCa) to 30% (PCa) addressed the cons of screening. LIMITATIONS: Recall bias is possible because screening process reports were not independently validated. CONCLUSIONS: Cancer screening decisions reported by patients who discussed screening with their health care providers consistently failed to meet criteria for being informed. Given the high ratings for provider information and frequent recommendations for screening, providers have important opportunities to ensure that informed decision making occurs for cancer screening decisions.
  BACKGROUND: To make informed decisions, patients must have adequate knowledge of key decision-relevant facts. OBJECTIVE: To determine adults' knowledge about information relevant to common types of medication, screening, or surgery decisions they recently made. SETTING: National sample of US adults identified by random-digit dialing. DESIGN: Cross-sectional survey conducted between November 2006 and May 2007. PARTICIPANTS: A total of 2575 English-speaking adults aged 40 y or older who reported having discussed the following medical decisions with a health care provider within the previous 2 y: prescription medications for hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, or depression; screening tests for colorectal, breast, or prostate cancer; or surgeries for knee/hip replacement, cataracts, or lower back pain. MEASUREMENTS: Participants answered knowledge questions and rated the importance of their health care provider, family/friends, and the media as sources of information. RESULTS: Accuracy rates varied widely across questions and decision contexts. For example, patients considering cataract surgery were more likely to correctly estimate recovery time than those patients considering lower back pain or knee/hip replacement (78% v. 29% and 39%, P < 0.001). Similarly, participants were more knowledgeable of facts about colorectal cancer screening than those who were asked about breast or prostate cancer. Finally, respondents were consistently more knowledgeable on comparable questions about blood pressure medication than cholesterol medication or antidepressants. The impact of demographic characteristics and sources of information also varied substantially. For example, blacks had lower knowledge than whites about cancer screening decisions (odds ratio [OR] = 0.57; 95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.43, 0.75; P = 0.001) and medication (OR = 0.77; 95% CI = 0.60, 0.97; P = 0.03) even after we controlled for other demographic factors. The same was not true for surgical decisions. LIMITATIONS: The questions did not measure all knowledge relevant to informed decision making, were subject to recall biases, and may have assessed numeracy more than knowledge. CONCLUSIONS: Patient knowledge of key facts relevant to recently made medical decisions is often poor and varies systematically by decision type and patient characteristics. Improving patient knowledge about risks, benefits, and characteristics of medical procedures is essential to support informed decision making.
  BACKGROUND: Patient involvement is required before patients' preferences can be reflected in the medical care they receive. Furthermore, patients are a vital link between physicians' assessments of patients' needs and actual implementation of appropriate care. Yet no study has specifically examined how and when a representative sample of patients considered, discussed, and made medical decisions. OBJECTIVE: To identify decision prevalence and decision-making processes regarding 1) initiation of prescription medications for hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, or depression; 2) screening tests for colorectal, breast, or prostate cancer; and 3) surgeries for knee or hip replacement, cataracts, or lower back pain. DESIGN: Computer-assisted telephone interview survey. SETTING: Nationally representative sample of US adults in households with telephones. PARTICIPANTS: 3010 English-speaking adults age 40 and older identified using a stratified random sample of telephone numbers. MEASUREMENTS: Estimated prevalence of medical decisions, defined as the patient having initiated medications, been screened, or had surgery within the past 2 years or having discussed these actions with a health care provider during the same interval, as well as decision-specific data regarding patient knowledge, attitudes and patient-provider interactions. RESULTS: 82.2% of the target population reported making at least 1 medical decision in the preceding 2 years. The proportion of decisions resulting in patient action varied dramatically both across decision type (medications [61%] v. screening [83%] v. surgery [44%]; P < 0.001), and within each category (e.g., blood pressure medications [76%] v. cholesterol medications [55%] vs. depression medications [48%]; P < 0.001). Respondents reported making more decisions if they had a primary care provider or poorer health status and fewer decisions if they had lower education, were male, or were under age 50. Limitations. Retrospective self-reports may incorporate recall biases. CONCLUSIONS: Medical decisions with significant life-saving, quality of life, and cost implications are a pervasive part of life for most US adults. The DECISIONS dataset provides a rich research environment for exploring factors influencing when and how patients make common medical decisions.
  Purpose: To evaluate the levels of asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA), an endothelin and nitric oxide (NO) synthase inhibitor, in patients with node-positive breast cancer who had undergone surgery and in a control group including healthy individuals. The effects of taxane-based chemotherapy on endothelin-1 (ET-1) and ADMA levels in the patient group were also studied. Methods: Body mass index (BMI), serum lipids (total cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol and triglycerides), ADMA and ET-1 were studied in 19 healthy individuals and in 19 patients with stage II and III, lymph node-positive breast cancer receiving taxane-based chemotherapy. Results: ET-1 (34.3±12.8 vs. 13.8±4.5 pg/mL; p<0.001) and ADMA (0.87±0.18 vs. 0.68±0.24 μmol/L; p=0.024) levels were significantly higher in the breast cancer group compared to the control group. A significant reduction was noted in ET-1 (34.3±12.8 vs. 27.3±4.3 pg/mL; p=0.021) and ADMA (0.87±0.18 vs. 0.73±0.15 μmol/L; p=0.014) levels in patients following 6 cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy to baseline values. Conclusion: The present study demonstrated significantly higher levels of ET-1 and ADMA in the breast cancer group compared to the control group, which were reduced significantly with adjuvant taxane-based chemotherapy. It is apparent that prospective studies are needed to understand the effect of reducing ET-1 and ADMA levels on patient survival. We believe that the present study will provide guidance to relevant future studies.
  Purpose: To evaluate the necessity and direct cost effectiveness of screening and staging procedures in breast cancer patients having ≥4 positive axillary lymph nodes and to identify further possible biopathological risk factors associated with increased risk of metastasis. Methods: We reviewed the demographic and clinicopathological data from the medical records of 1897 newly diagnosed breast cancer patients. Patients having ≥4 positive axillary lymph nodes after primary surgery for breast cancer and who had staging examinations for metastasis were eligible. The impact of staging procedures (thoracoabdominal CT, bone scan etc.) for detecting metastasis, decision of adjuvant treatment and direct costs were analyzed in 329 patients with operable breast cancer. Results: Thirty-five (10.6%) patients were found with metastasis at diagnosis. Seven (20.0%) among them had multiple metastases. Eighteen (51.4%) had lung, 17 (48.6%) bone, and 7 (20.0%) liver metastasis. Twenty-one (60.0%) patients needed further radiological investigation for metastasis confirmation. Treatment decision was changed in 27 (77.1%) patients. No statistically significant risk factor was identified among the metastatic patients by means of conventional demographic and biopathological parameters. The cost of screening was lower when compared to the cost of treatment without any screening procedure. Conclusion: Since the conventional clinicopathological data seems not sufficient to define the risk of developing metastasis in breast cancer patients with ≥4 axillary lymph node involvement, all of them should undergo full staging examinations until new parameters based on genomic level are defined. Staging procedures need modification for high risk breast cancer patients.
  Purpose: To compare ultrasonographic (US) with computerized tomographic (CT) images in order to choose electron energy for radiotherapy (RT) boost field in patients with breast conserving surgery (BCS). Methods: Thirty-seven consecutive patients with breast cancer treated by BCS and RT in our department were evaluated. Median age was 49 years (range 32-82). According to the Dokuz Eylul Breast Tumor Group Protocol (DEBTG), in patients with BCS, RT (5000 cGy to the whole breast ± lymphatic area) and boost with electron energy to the primary tumor bed (1000 cGy if surgical margin negative, or 1600 cGy if surgical margin positive was delivered. Before January 2003, the distances between skin-the deepest point of tumor bed (STD), skin-clips (SCD), and skin-fascia (SFD) were measured with US to choose electron energy in boost field. Since then, CT simulation images were used to this purpose. These two imaging systems were compared in this study. Electron energy was selected after measurement of the deepest metallic clips in CT simulation images (90%) or measurement of the STD if no clips were present (10%). Results: Median measurements with US and CT were as follows: STD: US 12 mm (range 4-35), CT 28 mm (range 2-54); SFD: US 25 mm (range 6-57), CT 31 mm (range 2-93); SCD: US 14 mm (range 7-26), CT 29 mm (range 2-68). The median electron energy was 9 MeV é (range 6-12) for US and 12 MeV é (range 6-21) for CT. Concordance in US and CT measurements was 27%. Conclusion: This preliminary study reveals that CT-based SCD measurements are deeper than US measurements, and selected electron energy with CT is 3 MeV higher than US. These two factors can affect local control and side effects. We noticed only one local recurrence in 37 patients. We did not evaluate side effects in this study. These could be a subject of a future study.
  Certain lifestyle and environmental factors play an important role on breast cancer (BC) risk, but data on the influence of nutritional factors are still conflicting. Migrational data have pointed to nutrition as one of the more relevant external factors involved. So far, the only well established nutrition-related risk factors for BC are obesity and alcohol consumption. The evidence that body fatness is a cause of postmenopausal breast cancer is convincing as is the evidence that alcoholic drinks are a cause of BC in all ages. On the other hand, body fatness probably protects against BC diagnosed premenopause. It is more likely that the BC risk is related to life-long dietary habits. The general preventive recommendation often includes a reduction of alcohol, red meat and total dietary fat, and increase in vegetable and fruit consumption. The purpose of this work was to summarize and present current opinions on the influence of diet and nutrition on BC etiology and to suggest possible preventive measures.
  In this review we will provide a synopsis of the biological markers used in the care of breast cancer patients with emphasis on clinical application. The advent of molecular technology has incorporated new biomarkers along with the older immunohistochemical and serum ones. Serum tumor markers are proteins shed from breast cancer cells. Their levels have long been used as a measure of tumor burden and disease progression or recurrence. However, limitations exist that should be known to those involved in breast cancer management. Historically, immunohistochemical markers have been used to guide treatment decisions. These markers reveal characteristics of the cancer cells and have been used both as prognostic and predictive factors. Molecular markers give information on the expression of certain genes in tumor tissues related to proliferation, invasion, and metastasis and researchers try to correlate them with the use of mathematical modeling with clinical outcomes, hence those markers exhibit prognostic and predictive significance. All these tools can guide personalized treatment by estimating patient prognosis and risk of relapse and tailor accordingly therapeutic approaches.
  There is now convincing evidence of an increased risk of patients with obesity or type 2 diabetes developing cancer. To understand the possible causation, type 2 diabetic muscle lysine to arginine (MKR) mice were studied. Introduction of mammary tumour cell lines resulted in aggressive growth of the mammary tumours in the hyperinsulinaemic MKR female mice. Blocking the insulin receptor activation or reducing the hyperinsulinaemia reduced the mammary tumour burden. Thus, hyperinsulinaemia may be one of the factors in the increased breast cancer risk seen with obesity and type 2 diabetes. Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
  Objective: Recent reports suggest that Black breast cancer patients receive adjuvant therapies less often than their White counterparts; however, few studies have examined the self-reported experiences of Black breast cancer patients making treatment decisions. This study examined cultural beliefs and healthcare factors that impacted Black women's treatment decisions.Methods: In-depth interviews were conducted with 49 Black women with early stage breast cancer (stages 0-III). Participants resided in Washington, DC (n = 13), and Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (n = 36). Women's ages ranged from 26 to 85 (m = 53.9). All interviews were transcribed verbatim and then entered into a qualitative software program. Three coders independently read and coded transcripts using this software.Results: The data did not reveal common cultural themes that influenced women's treatment decisions. Spiritual beliefs were important to all participants and did seem to help them cope with and reframe their illness experiences. The patient-provider relationship was the most notable factor that influenced treatment decisions. While most women reported that they were satisfied with their provider relationships, their narratives revealed that many lacked knowledge about their diagnoses and treatment regimens. Those patients who demonstrated a better understanding of their disease and treatments also seemed to adhere to recommendations for adjuvant therapy.Conclusions: Poor communication may impact treatment decision-making and, ultimately, outcomes. Important next steps will include quantifying Black women's patient-provider interactions and examining how these factors influence adherence behaviors. Ensuring that patients understand their diagnosis and treatment options will also be important for clinical practice. Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
  PURPOSE: The survival of patients with liver metastases from solid tumors is poor. We conducted a phase I study of hepatic arterial infusion (HAI) paclitaxel in patients with advanced cancer and predominant liver involvement. METHODS: Patients were treated with HAI paclitaxel 150-275 mg/m(2) (and 15,000 IU heparin intraarterially) every 28 days. A "3 + 3" study design was used. RESULTS: Twenty-six patients were treated (median age, 59 years). Diagnoses were colorectal cancer (n = 10), breast cancer (n = 7), and other (n = 9). The median number of prior therapies was four (range, 0-10). The maximum tolerated dose (MTD) was HAI paclitaxel 225 mg/m(2). Dose-limiting toxicities (DLTs) included Grade 3 neuropathy (1 of 5 patients) at HAI paclitaxel 275 mg/m(2) and Grade 4 thrombocytopenia and neutropenia, and Grade 3 mucositis (1 of 4 patients) at 250 mg/m(2). None of the eight patients treated with HAI paclitaxel 225 mg/m(2) experienced a DLT. The most common toxicities were nausea and peripheral neuropathy. Of 22 patients evaluable for response, 3 (13.6%) patients had SD for ≥4 months (colorectal cancer, n = 1; thyroid cancer, n = 1; and hepatocellular carcinoma, n = 1; duration of response was 4 months, 7.1 months, and 22.2+ months, respectively). CONCLUSION: The MTD of HAI paclitaxel was 225 mg/m(2). This regimen was well tolerated and had antitumor activity in selected patients.
  mTOR plays a key role in tumor cell cycle control, proliferation, and survival. RAD001 (everolimus) is a novel macrolide that inhibits mTOR and thus downstream signaling pathways. 31 post-menopausal women with early breast cancer were given 5 mg RAD001 once daily for 14 days prior to surgery. Biopsies were taken at diagnosis and at surgery (post 14 days of treatment) and assessed for immunohistochemical changes in proliferation (Ki67), apoptosis (active caspase-3), p-AKT (s473), p-S6 (s235/236 and s240/244), p-mTOR (s2448), ER, and PR. Five patients did not complete the 2-week treatment period due to adverse events. All adverse events were grade 1 or 2 (NCIC-CTC scale). RAD001 treatment significantly decreased proliferation (geometric mean reduction 74% from baseline (p = 0.019)), particularly in HER-2 positive tumors. High Ki67 pre-treatment correlated with reduction in Ki67, an increase in apoptosis, a reduction in p-AKT (cytoplasmic) and reduction in p-mTOR following treatment. Nuclear expression of p-AKT was significantly reduced with treatment. Tumors that had a reduction in Ki67 with treatment exhibited a significant reduction in cytoplasmic p-AKT. p-S6 staining was significantly reduced independently of Ki67 (p < 0.001 for two sites of phosphorylation). RAD001 5 mg/daily is safe and tolerable in postmenopausal early breast cancer patients and inhibits the mTOR pathway and its downstream effectors, significantly reducing tumor cell proliferation. Tumors with high Ki67, high p-AKT, and HER-2 positivity may be more responsive to mTOR inhibition with RAD001. This is the first study to report results of RAD001 5 mg as a single agent in early breast cancer.
  The prognosis of patients with CNS involvement of solid tumors is poor. In these patients, systemic chemotherapy has a theoretical advantage of concurrent treatment of systemic disease and reduced risk of neurotoxicity. Here, we report on the efficacy and toxicity of topotecan/ifosfamide (TOPO/IFO) combination chemotherapy in patients treated for CNS involvement of different solid malignancies. Fourteen patients with CNS manifestations (seven with brain metastases, two meningeal carcinomatosis, and five both) of solid tumors (seven with breast cancer, six lung cancer, and one unknown primary cancer) received TOPO/IFO treatment. Eleven patients each were pretreated with 1-6 systemic therapy regimens and whole-brain irradiation. Patients received a total of 34 (median 2) TOPO/IFO cycles. TOPO dosage was 3.6 mg/m(2) (1.2 mg/m(2), days 1-3) and IFO dosage 3,000 mg/m(2) (1,500 mg/m(2), days 1-2) per cycle. Of 12 patients with brain metastases, one patient had partial remission, three stable disease, two progressed, and six had no radiologic CNS response evaluation. Response of meningeal carcinomatosis was found in two and progressive disease in two (three patients not evaluated). Neurologic improvement or stabilization was observed in six of twelve evaluable patients. No systemic tumor response was seen in seven evaluated patients. Grade 3/4 toxicities in eleven evaluable patients were leukopenia (n = 9), infection (n = 6), and thrombopenia (n = 5). Median time to treatment failure was 43 days and median overall survival 107 days. Symptom control was frequently achieved with TOPO/IFO systemic chemotherapy despite a low objective response rate. The feasibility of this treatment is impaired by severe hematotoxicity.
  The immunophenotypic predictive profile of BRCA1-associated cancers including major predictive markers, i.e., PARP-1, EGFR, c-kit, HER-2, and steroid hormones (ER/PR) that may have therapeutic relevance has not yet been reported in a comprehensive study. Using immunohistochemistry, we examined the expression of these proteins in a large cohort of BRCA1-associated breast cancers. PARP-1 immunoreactivity was found in 81.9%, EGFR in 43.6%, ER/PR in 17.9%, c-kit in 14.7%, and overexpression of HER-2 in 3.6% of cancers. For all markers studied, 8.2% of tumors were negative. Expression of only one predictive marker was found in 29.7% of cancers, and most frequently, it was PARP-1 (20.8%). In 62.1% of tumors, more than one predictive marker was expressed: PARP-1 and EGFR in 30.4%, PARP-1, and hormone receptors in 13.3% and PARP-1 with c-kit in 7.5% of all tumors. Coexpression of two or more other predictive markers was rare. There were significant differences in the median age at diagnosis of BRCA1-associated cancer between patients with ER+ vs. ER- and grades 1-2 vs. grade 3 tumors. These results demonstrate that BRCA1-associated cancers differ with respect to expression of proteins that are regarded as targets for specific therapies and that 92% of patients with BRCA1-associated cancers may benefit from one or several options for specific therapy (in addition to DNA damaging agents, e.g., cisplatin). About 8% of cancers which do not express therapeutic target proteins may not respond to such therapies. Knowledge of the immunophenotypic predictive profile may help with the recruitment of patients for trials of targeted therapies.
  Body fluids are easily accessible and contain valuable indices for medical diagnosis. Fascinating tools are tumour cells circulating in the peripheral blood of cancer patients. As these cells are extremely rare, they constitute a challenge for clinical diagnostics. In this contribution we present the Raman spectroscopic-based identification of different single cells in suspension that are found in peripheral blood of cancer patients including healthy cells like leukocytes and erythrocytes, and tumour cells like leukaemic cells and cells originating from solid tumours. Leukocytes and erythrocytes were isolated from the peripheral blood of healthy donors while myeloid leukaemia cells (OCI-AML3) and breast carcinoma derived cells (MCF-7, BT-20) were obtained from cell cultures. A laser emitting 785 nm light was used for optical trapping the single cells in the laser focus and to excite the Raman spectrum. Support vector machines were applied to develop a supervised classification model with spectra of 1210 cells originating from three different donors and three independent cultivation batches. Distinguishing tumour cells from healthy cells was achieved with a sensitivity of >99.7% and a specificity of >99.5%. In addition, the correct cell types were predicted with an accuracy of approximately 92%.
  Personalized medicine in the management of patients with prostate cancer is limited to the integration of patient attributes such as age, genetic risk and comorbidities with specific clinical-pathologic variables including serum prostate specific antigen (PSA), imaging and features from the diagnostic prostate needle biopsy or prostatectomy specimen including tumor differentiation (i.e. Gleason), volume and extent of disease (i.e. tumor length and / or percentage, number of positive cores at diagnosis or pathologic stage post surgery including margin status). Although the development of various clinical statistical instruments such as nomograms have provided a mechanism to interrogate such variables, most urologists rely on basic prognostic features of stage, grade and PSA along with clinical judgment to define and understand individual risk and predict health outcomes. Furthermore, unlike other tumor types such as breast cancer, there are no routine ancillary diagnostic studies performed on the prostate needle biopsy or prostatectomy specimen to support and refine the treatment decision process for the individual patient. In this review we will provide a summary of the current practice of predictive statistical modeling in prostate cancer and explore how technical advances in functional histology have played a role in the development and incorporation of a systems based platform for providing a patient-specific risk profile useful for clinical decision making.
  Cancer cells undergo epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) as a program of increased invasion and metastasis during cancer progression. Here, we report that a novel regulator of EMT in cancer cells is protein kinase D1 (PKD1), which is downregulated in advanced prostate, breast, and gastric cancers. Ectopic reexpression of PKD1 in metastatic prostate cancer cells reversibly suppressed expression of mesenchyme-specific genes and increased epithelial markers such as E-cadherin, whereas small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of PKD1 increased expression of mesenchyme markers. Further, PKD1 inhibited tumor growth and metastasis in a tumor xenograft model. PKD1 phosphorylates Ser(11) (S11) on transcription factor Snail, a master EMT regulator and repressor of E-cadherin expression, triggering nuclear export of Snail via 14-3-3σ binding. Snail S11 mutation causes acquisition of mesenchymal traits and expression of stem cell markers. Together, our results suggest that PKD1 functions as a tumor and metastasis suppressor, at least partly by regulating Snail-mediated EMT, and that loss of PKD1 may contribute to acquisition of an aggressive malignant phenotype. Cancer Res; 70(20); 7810-9. ©2010 AACR.
  Amplification of the 8p11-12 region has been found in about 15% of human breast cancers and is associated with poor prognosis. Earlier, we used genomic analysis of copy number and gene expression to perform a detailed analysis of the 8p11-12 amplicon to identify candidate oncogenes in breast cancer. We identified 21 candidate genes and provided evidence that three genes, namely, LSM-1, TC-1, and BAG4, have transforming properties when overexpressed. In the present study, we systematically investigated the transforming properties of 13 newly identified 8p11-12 candidate oncogenes in vitro. WHSC1L1, DDHD2, and ERLIN2 were most potently transforming oncogenes based on the number of altered phenotypes expressed by the cells. WHSC1L1 contains a PWWP-domain that is a methyl-lysine recognition motif involved in histone code modification and epigenetic regulation of gene expression. Knockdown of WHSC1L1 in 8p11-12-amplified breast cancer cells resulted in profound loss of growth and survival of these cells. Further, we identified several WHSC1L1 target genes, one of which is iroquois homeobox 3 gene (IRX3), a member of the Iroquois homeobox transcription factor family. Cancer Res; 70(21); OF1-11. ©2010 AACR.
  The transcription factor NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) binds the antioxidant DNA response element (ARE) to activate important cellular cytoprotective defense systems. Recently several types of cancers have been shown to overexpress Nrf2, but its role in the cellular response to radiation therapy has yet to be fully determined. In this study, we report that single doses of ionizing radiation from 2 to 8 Gy activate ARE-dependent transcription in breast cancer cells in a dose-dependent manner, but only after a delay of five days. Clinically relevant daily dose fractions of radiation also increased ARE-dependent transcription, but again only after five days. Downstream activation of Nrf2-ARE-dependent gene and protein markers, such as heme oxygenase-1, occurred, whereas Nrf2-deficient fibroblasts were incapable of these responses. Compared with wild-type fibroblasts, Nrf2-deficient fibroblasts had relatively high basal levels of reactive oxygen species that increased greatly five days after radiation exposure. Further, in vitro clonogenic survival assays and in vivo sublethal whole body irradiation tests showed that Nrf2 deletion increased radiation sensitivity, whereas Nrf2-inducing drugs did not increase radioresistance. Our results indicate that the Nrf2-ARE pathway is important to maintain resistance to irradiation, but that it operates as a second-tier antioxidant adaptive response system activated by radiation only under specific circumstances, including those that may be highly relevant to tumor response during standard clinical dose-fractionated radiation therapy. Cancer Res; 70(21); OF1-10. ©2010 AACR.
  Signaling by urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) can cause epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in cultured breast cancer cells. In this report, we show that uPAR signaling can also induce cancer stem cell (CSC)-like properties. Ectopic overexpression of uPAR in human MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cells promoted the emergence of a CD24(-)/CD44(+) phenotype, characteristic of CSCs, while increasing the cell surface abundance of integrin subunits β1/CD29 and α6/CD49f that represent putative mammary gland stem cell biomarkers. uPAR overexpression increased mammosphere formation in vitro and tumor formation in an immunocompromized severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) mouse model of orthotopic breast cancer. Hypoxic conditions that are known to induce EMT in MDA-MB-468 cells also increased cell surface β1/CD29, mimicking the effects of uPAR overexpression. Antagonizing uPAR effector signaling pathways reversed the increase in cell surface integrin expression. Whereas uPAR overexpression did not induce EMT in MCF-7 breast cancer cells, CSC-like properties were nevertheless still induced along with an increase in tumor initiation and growth in the orthotopic setting in SCID mice. Notably, in MCF-7 cell mammospheres, which display a well-defined acinus-like structure with polarized expression of E-cadherin and β1-integrin, cell collapse into the central cavity was decreased by uPAR overexpression, suggesting that uPAR signaling may stabilize epithelial morphology. In summary, our findings show that uPAR signaling can induce CSC-like properties in breast cancer cells, either concomitantly with or separately from EMT. Cancer Res; 70(21); OF1-11. ©2010 AACR.
  The DNA damage response (DDR) activates downstream pathways including cell cycle checkpoints. The cyclin D1 gene is overexpressed or amplified in many human cancers and is required for gastrointestinal, breast, and skin tumors in murine models. A common polymorphism in the human cyclin D1 gene is alternatively spliced, resulting in cyclin D1a and D1b proteins that differ in their carboxyl terminus. Cyclin D1 overexpression enhances DNA damage-induced apoptosis. The role of cyclin D1 and the alternative splice form in regulating the DDR is not well understood. Herein cyclin D1a overexpression enhanced the DDR as characterized by induction of γH2AX phosphorylation, the assembly of DNA repair foci, specific recruitment of DNA repair factors to chromatin, and G(2)-M arrest. Cyclin D1 deletion in fibroblasts or small interfering RNA-mediated reduction of endogenous cyclin D1 in colon cancer cells reduced the 5-fluorouracil-mediated DDR. Mechanistic studies showed that cyclin D1a, like DNA repair factors, elicited the DDR when stably associated with chromatin. Cancer Res; 70(21); OF1-10. ©2010 AACR.
  In the earliest stages of metastasis, breast cancer cells must reorganize the cytoskeleton to affect cell shape change and promote cell invasion and motility. These events require the cytoskeletal regulators Cdc42 and Rho, their effectors such as N-WASp/WAVE, and direct inducers of actin polymerization such as Arp2/3. Little consideration has been given to molecules that shape the cell membrane. The F-BAR proteins CIP4, TOCA-1, and FBP17 generate membrane curvature and act as scaffolding proteins for activated Cdc42 and N-WASp. We found that expression of CIP4, but not TOCA-1 or FBP17, was increased in invasive breast cancer cell lines in comparison with weakly or noninvasive breast cancer cell lines. Endogenous CIP4 localized to the leading edge of migrating cells and to invadopodia in cells invading gelatin. Because CIP4 serves as a scaffolding protein for Cdc42, Src, and N-WASp, we tested whether loss of CIP4 could result in decreased N-WASp function. Interaction between CIP4 and N-WASp was epidermal growth factor responsive, and CIP4 silencing by small interfering RNA caused decreased tyrosine phosphorylation of N-WASp at a Src-dependent activation site (Y256). CIP4 silencing also impaired the migration and invasion of MDA-MB-231 cells and was associated with decreased formation of invadopodia and gelatin degradation. This study presents a new role for CIP4 in the promotion of migration and invasion of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells and establishes the contribution of F-BAR proteins to cancer cell motility and invasion. Cancer Res; 70(21); OF1-10. ©2010 AACR.
  CONTEXT: Cancer screening has been integrated into routine primary care but does not benefit patients with limited life expectancy. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the extent to which patients with advanced cancer continue to be screened for new cancers. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Utilization of cancer screening procedures (mammography, Papanicolaou test, prostate-specific antigen [PSA], and lower gastrointestinal [GI] endoscopy) was assessed in 87,736 fee-for-service Medicare enrollees aged 65 years or older diagnosed with advanced lung, colorectal, pancreatic, gastroesophageal, or breast cancer between 1998 and 2005, and reported to one of the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) tumor registries. Participants were followed up until death or December 31, 2007, whichever came first. A group of 87,307 Medicare enrollees without cancer were individually matched by age, sex, race, and SEER registry to patients with cancer and observed over the same period to evaluate screening rates in context. Demographic and clinical characteristics associated with screening were also investigated. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: For each cancer screening test, utilization rates were defined as the percentage of patients who were screened following the diagnosis of an incurable cancer. RESULTS: Among women following advanced cancer diagnosis compared with controls, at least 1 screening mammogram was received by 8.9% (95% confidence interval [CI], 8.6%-9.1%) vs 22.0% (95% CI, 21.7%-22.5%); Papanicolaou test screening was received by 5.8% (95% CI, 5.6%-6.1%) vs 12.5% (95% CI, 12.2%-12.8%). Among men following advanced cancer diagnosis compared with controls, PSA test was received by 15.0% (95% CI, 14.7%-15.3%) vs 27.2% (95% CI, 26.8%-27.6%). For all patients following advanced diagnosis compared with controls, lower GI endoscopy was received by 1.7% (95% CI, 1.6%-1.8%) vs 4.7% (95% CI, 4.6%-4.9%). Screening was more frequent among patients with a recent history of screening (16.2% [95% CI, 15.4%-16.9%] of these patients had mammography, 14.7% [95% CI, 13.7%-15.6%] had a Papanicolaou test, 23.3% [95% CI, 22.6%-24.0%] had a PSA test, and 6.1% [95% CI, 5.2%-7.0%] had lower GI endoscopy). CONCLUSION: A sizeable proportion of patients with advanced cancer continue to undergo cancer screening tests that do not have a meaningful likelihood of providing benefit.
  PURPOSE: PIK3CA mutations are frequent in breast cancer and activate the PI3K/Akt pathway. Unexpectedly, PIK3CA mutation appears in general to be associated with better outcome. In a cohort of patients where both primary and metastatic lesions were available the objective was to assess changes in PIK3CA mutations. We wished to discern whether selective pressures occur and the influence of PIK3CA mutation on time to recurrence.EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor blocks were obtained from 104 patients with paired samples from primary tumors and corresponding asynchronous metastatic breast tumors. Samples were analysed for PIK3CA mutations (exon 9 and 20) as well as immunohistochemical evaluation for PTEN, pAKT, Ki67, ER and HER2. RESULTS: PIK3CA mutation was detected in 45 % of the primary tumors. Overall there was a net gain in mutation in metastatic disease, to 53 %; nonetheless there were instances where metastases were wild type in patients with PIK3CA mutant primary tumors. Laser capture microdissection on a subset of cases revealed microheterogeneity for PIK3CA mutational status in the primary tumor. PIK3CA mutants overall showed a significantly longer time to first recurrence than wild type cases (p=0.03). CONCLUSIONS: PIK3CA mutations occur at high frequency in primary and metastatic breast cancer; these may not necessarily confer increased aggressiveness as mutants had a longer time to recurrence. Because PIK3CA status quite frequently changes between primary and metastatic disease, it emphasizes the necessity of assessing the PIK3CA status in the metastatic lesion for selection of PIK3CA inhibitor therapy.
  PURPOSE Distress has been recognized as the sixth vital sign in cancer care and several guidelines recommend routine screening. Despite this, screening for distress is rarely conducted and infrequently evaluated. METHODS A program of routine online screening for distress was implemented for new patients with breast and lung cancer. Patients were randomly assigned to one of three conditions: (1) minimal screening: the distress thermometer (DT) only plus usual care; (2) full screening: DT, problem checklist, Psychological Screen for Cancer part C measuring anxiety and depression, a personalized report summarizing concerns and the report on the medical file; or (3) triage: full screening plus optional personalized phone triage with referral to resources. Patients in all conditions received an information packet and were reassessed 3 months later with the full screening battery. Results Five hundred eighty-five patients with breast cancer and 549 patients with lung cancer were assessed at baseline (89% of all patients), and 75.5% retained for follow-up. High prevalence of baseline distress was found across patients. Twenty percent fewer patients with lung cancer in triage continued to have high distress at follow-up compared to those in the other two groups, and patients with breast cancer in the full screening and triage conditions showed lower distress at follow-up than those in minimal screening. The best predictor of decreased anxiety and depression in full screening and triage conditions was receiving a referral to psychosocial services. CONCLUSION Routine online screening is feasible in a large cancer center and may help to reduce future distress levels, particularly when coupled with uptake of appropriate resources.
  PURPOSE The National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project C-08 trial was designed to investigate the safety and efficacy of adding bevacizumab to modified FOLFOX6 (mFOLFOX6; ie, infusional/bolus fluorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin) for the adjuvant treatment of patients with stages II to III colon cancer. METHODS Patients received mFOLFOX6 every 2 weeks for 26 weeks alone or modified as FOLFOX6 + bevacizumab (5 mg/kg every 2 weeks for 52 weeks [ie, experimental group]). The primary end point was disease-free survival (DFS). Results Among 2,672 analyzed patients, demographic factors were well balanced by treatment. With a median follow-up of 35.6 months, the addition of bevacizumab to mFOLFOX6 did not result in an overall significant increase in DFS (hazard ratio [HR], 0.89; 95% CI, 0.76 to 1.04; P = .15). The point estimates for 3-year DFS for the overall population were 77.4% and 75.5% for the experimental and control arms, respectively. For patients with stages II and III diseases, these same estimates were 87.4% and 84.7%, respectively, for stage II and 74.2% and 72.4%, respectively, for stage III. Exploratory analyses found that the effect of bevacizumab on DFS was different before and after a 15-month landmark (time-by-treatment interaction P value < .0001). Bevacizumab had a strong effect before the landmark (HR, 0.61; 95% CI, 0.48 to 0.78; P < .001) but no significant effect after (HR, 1.22; 95% CI, 0.98 to 1.52; P = .076). CONCLUSION Bevacizumab for 1 year with mFOLFOX6 does not significantly prolong DFS in stages II and III colon cancer. However, a significant but transient effect during bevacizumab exposure was observed in the experimental arm. We postulate that this observation reflects a biologic effect during bevacizumab exposure. Given the lack of improvement in DFS, the use of bevacizumab cannot be recommended for use in the adjuvant treatment of patients with colon cancer.
  Breast cancer throughout the world is a significant health problem for women. Small clusters of microcalcifications appearing as collection of white spots on mammograms indicate an early warning of breast cancer. In present work we have initiated computer?aided analysis of mammograms to automate the diagnostic procedures for breast cancer screening using multiresolution and FCM based clustering algorithms. Further region growing approach has been applied to segment considerably larger calcifications and the masses. The advantage of the proposed method is its ability to detect both tiny and comparatively larger calcifications in a single image and to reduce the false-positive appearance of microcalcifications in breast.
  BACKGROUND: Cancer health disparities affecting low-income and minority patients are well documented. Root-causes are multifactorial, including diagnostic and treatment delays, social and financial barriers, and poor communication. Patient navigation and communication coaching (activation) are potential interventions to address disparities in cancer treatment. The purpose of this clinical trial is to test the effectiveness of an intervention combining patient navigation and activation to improve cancer treatment. METHODS: The Rochester Patient Navigation Research Program (PNRP) is a National Cancer Institute-sponsored, patient-level randomized trial (RCT) of patient navigation and activation, targeting newly-diagnosed breast and colorectal cancer patients in Rochester, NY. The goal of the program is to decrease cancer health disparities by addressing barriers to receipt of cancer care and promoting patient self-efficacy. The intervention uses trained, paraprofessional patient navigators recruited from the target community, and a detailed training and supervisory program. Recruited patients are randomly assigned to receive either usual care (except for baseline and follow-up questionnaires and interviews) or intervention. The intervention patients receive tailored assistance from their patient navigators, including phone calls, in-person meetings, and behind-the-scenes coordination of care. A total of 344 patients have been recruited. Outcomes measured at three month intervals include timeliness of care, patient adherence, patient satisfaction, quality of life, self-efficacy, health literacy, and cancer knowledge. DISCUSSION: This unique intervention combining patient navigation and patient activation is designed to address the multifactorial problem of cancer health disparities. If successful, this study will affect the design and implementation of patient navigation programs. Trials Registration: clinicaltrials.gov identifier NCT00496678.
  INTRODUCTION: A family history of later-onset breast cancer (FHLBC) may suggest multi-factorial inheritance of breast cancer risk, including unhealthy lifestyle behaviors that may be shared within families. We assessed whether adherence to lifestyle behaviors recommended for breast cancer prevention--including maintaining a healthful body weight, being physically active and limiting alcohol intake--modifies breast cancer risk attributed to FHLBC in postmenopausal women. METHODS: Breast cancer outcomes through August 2003 were analyzed in relationship to lifestyle and risk factors collected by questionnaire during enrollment (between 1993 and 1998) of 85,644 postmenopausal women into the Women's Health Initiative Observational Study. RESULTS: During a mean follow-up of 5.4 years, 1997 women were diagnosed with invasive breast cancer. The rate of invasive breast cancer among women with an FHLBC who participated in all three behaviors was 5.94 per 1,000 woman-years, compared with 6.97 per 1,000 woman-years among women who participated in none of the behaviors. The rate among women with no FHLBC who participated in all three behavioral conditions was 3.51 per 1,000 woman-years compared to 4.67 per 1,000 woman-years for those who participated in none. We did not observe a clinically important departure from additive effects (Interaction Contrast: 0.00014; 95% CI: -0.00359, 0.00388). CONCLUSIONS: Participating in breast healthy behaviours was beneficial to postmenopausal women and the degree of this benefit was the same for women with and without an FHLBC.
  The urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) and its main inhibitor PAI-1 play key roles in tumorassociated processes such as the degradation of the extracellular matrix (ECM), tissue remodeling, cell adhesion and migration. Elevated expression of both molecules is known to correlate with negative outcomes in node negative breast cancer. To date, these molecules are the only prognostic markers to have reached the highest level of evidence (LOE I) in multi-centered clinical trials for prognosis of node negative breast cancer. Unfortunately, the clinical utility of these molecules as markers is limited by the use of enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA) tests for their detection. The ELISA relies on the use of fresh or frozen tissue, which are rarely available in routine clinical settings. In this review article, we provide an overview of the clinical relevance of uPA and PAI-1 and present alternative methods for their detection. Common uPA and PAI-1 detection methods discussed in literature include RT-PCR-based assays and classical immunohistochemistry approaches. In recent years, attempts have been made to isolate and analyze proteins of formalin fixed, paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues. These new methods are of special interest because up to now neither RT-PCR nor immunohistochemistry are recommended for the detection of uPA and PAI-1. Here, we present an approach for the analysis of uPA and PAI-1 directly from FFPE tissues that may eventually overcome the limitations of current assays and make the use of both markers widely available for routine prognosis and therapy decisions for breast cancer patients.
  This qualitative focus group study describes posttraumatic growth experiences of African American adolescents currently coping with parental breast cancer. Twelve adolescents participated in three focus groups assessing their experiences with parental cancer. Spontaneous accounts of posttraumatic growth were reported by all participants. A content analysis revealed reports in four of the five domains of posttraumatic growth identified by Tedeschi and Calhoun (1996) which included: greater appreciation for life, enhanced interpersonal relationships, increased sense of personal strengths, and changed priorities. An additional domain, change in health behaviors and attitudes, also emerged. These findings add important knowledge to the developing field of research in posttraumatic growth in populations where available research is scarce, especially among adolescents and racial minorities. (PsycINFO Database Record (c) 2010 APA, all rights reserved).
  Insulin glargine was the first long-acting human insulin analogue to be authorised in the European Union, in the early 2000s, for the treatment of diabetes mellitus. It has about a 6-fold increase in affinity for the insulinlike growth factor 1 (EGF-1) receptor compared with natural human insulin, which may stimulate tumour development. Four European epidemiological studies published in 2009 examined the risk of cancer in diabetic patients treated with insulin glargine. One of these studies, conducted in Germany, showed a statistically significant dose-dependent increase in the risk of cancer. Two other studies, one in Scotland and the other in Sweden, showed an increase in the risk of breast cancer. The fourth study, conducted in the UK, showed a lower risk of cancer in patients on metformin. This evidence is inconclusive, notably because these studies did not take confounding factors into account. Nevertheless, the results tend to be similar and consistent with certain pharmacological mechanisms. In practice, pending more solid evidence, these epidemiological results should be taken into account when weighing the risk-benefit balance of insulin therapy for diabetic patients, on a case by case basis, depending on the type of diabetes, patient history, life expectancy, and the possible practical advantages of insulin glargine.
  Recent studies have revealed that hScrib, the human homolog of Drosophila Scribble, is an apical-basal polarity determinant and an essential component of the adherens junction. In addition, hScrib has a critical role in the inhibition of cell proliferation through cell cycle progression. hScrib has been reported to be involved in the processes of many cancers, such as breast cancer, cervical cancer, colon carcinoma, etc.; however, the correlation between hScrib and endometrial cancer has not been identified. To address a possible role of hScrib in the development of endometrial cancer, we examined the localization and expression of hScrib in endometrial cancer. The present study demonstrated that decreased expression and changed localization of hScrib were associated with clinical stage, histopathological differentiation, and lymph node metastasis in endometrial cancer. hScrib might share an adherens junction with basolateral membrane partially by acting on E-cadherin in endometrial cancer. This evidence suggests that hScrib is involved in the development of endometrial cancer.
  The objective of this study was to analyze the genotype distributions and allele frequencies for ROCK2 Thr431Asn and Arg83Lys polymorphisms among breast cancer patients. In this case-control study, 223 patients with breast cancer were recruited and divided into two groups according to metastases (n = 128) and without metastases (n = 95). Genomic DNA from the patients and the control cases (n = 150) was analyzed by real-time PCR using a Light-Cycler. Neither genotype distributions nor the allele frequencies for the Arg83Lys polymorphism showed a significant difference between the groups. Although no marked changes were observed with nonmetastatic group, a statistically significant association was found between the control and metastatic group for the Thr431Asn polymorphism. Although homozygous carriers of the Thr431Thr genotype were more frequent, heterozygous carriers of the Thr431Asn genotype were less frequent among the metastatic patients than among controls. There was also an increase in Thr431 allele (60.5% in patients vs. 51.7% in controls) and decrease in Asn431 allele frequencies (48.3% in control vs. 39.5% in metastatic patients) in metastatic groups (p = 0.036). Our results demonstrate that Thr431Asn polymorphism of the ROCK2 gene could be a risk factor for the metastases of the breast cancer, and may help in predicting the prognosis.
  Raman Mapping spectra were collected on the samples of the normal human breast duct epithelia and the infiltrating duct carcinoma with the excitation wavelength of 633 nm and fitted with the morphological model which was presented before by the author. The normalized coefficients were calculated and used to make Raman images. Examining these images, the authors find that they show quite clearly the distribution of the chemicals which the basis spectrum was mainly derived from and that the DNA coefficient image also indicates the positions and scales of the cell nucleus, while the bright DNA area is bigger and brighter for the infiltrating duct carcinoma than for the normal breast dust epithelia, suggesting the cell nucleus in cancer tissue are larger than those in normal tissue. The correlation coefficient images were also made on these mapping spectra and examined in comparison with these model images, and it was showed that the model images have higher resolution and sensitivity although they are very similar. This work is helpful to understanding the morphological basis of the breast tissue Raman spectra and to developing the Raman diagnostic method for breast tumor.
  BACKGROUND: In Mexico, cervical cancer is the second leading cause of death in women after breast cancer. The human papillomavirus is associated with intraepithelial lesions, detected up to 99.7% of cervical carcinomas. Despite being easy to detect is a condition that many women suffer. OBJECTIVE: To determine the diagnostic utility of the visual inspection with acetic acid of the uterine cervix compared with the cervical cytology. PATIENTS AND METHOD: Study of diagnostic tests. The study was realized in the Centro de Atención Materno Infantil y Planificación Familiar of the Instituto de Investigación Científica, Durango, Mexico, research of the Juárez University of the State of Durango, from August 23, 2005 to November 13, 2006. 1,521 participants were examined who went consecutively to opportune detection of cervical cancer. One doctor practiced the test of acetic acid and cervical cytology to them, and one digital photograph, which was evaluated by three inter-observers triple blind. Those that was positive to anyone of these tests, were remitted to colposcopy and/or biopsy; also to 10% of selected negative population randomly was realized this procedure. Sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive values and exactitude were determined. For the agreement inter-observer index of Kappa was used. RESULTS: Sensitivity, specificity, values predictive positive, negative and exactitude for the visual inspection with acetic acid were 20, 97, 5 and 99%, respectively. For the cervical cytology were of 80, 99, 57 and 99%, respectively. The force of agreement between the interobservant was poor. CONCLUSIONS: In this study cervical cytology was more useful than visual inspection with acetic acid to detect dysplasias or cervical cancer opportunely, due to detect all the positive true cases confirmed by biopsy.
  In women, breast cancer causes over one million new cases each year, of which about half occur in industrialized countries, however, is in developing countries like ours, where most deaths due to this cause. Currently, the breast cancer is the leading cause of death from malignancy in women over 25 years. The conclusions of the Third Review of the National Consensus on Diagnosis and Treatment of Breast Cancer are a guide for oncologists, mastologists and the medical community in general. This review involved more than 50 physicians with national recognition of all institutions and specialties related to this disease, in order to contribute their knowledge.
  In women, breast cancer causes over one million new cases each year, of which about half occur in industrialized countries, however, is in developing countries like ours, where most deaths due to this cause. Currently, the breast cancer is the leading cause of death from malignancy in women over 25 years. The conclusions of the Third Review of the National Consensus on Diagnosis and Treatment of Breast Cancer are a guide for oncologists, mastologists and the medical community in general. This review involved more than 50 physicians with national recognition of all institutions and specialties related to this disease, in order to contribute their knowledge.
  BACKGROUND: The chemotherapy commonly used for the treatment of breast cancer affect the fertility and could cause premature ovarian failure. The subsequent pregnancy to the breast cancer therefore it is not habitual. OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to identify the effects of the chemotherapy in the women reproductive life; to evaluate the frequency of the women that experienced a later pregnancy after treatment of cancer, as well as the effects of the subsequent pregnancy on the breast cancer. We report our experience in the 14 year period. MATERIAL AND METHOD: As retrospective design, of 14 cases with breast cancer and subsequent pregnancy, from March 1994 to June 2008; demographic variables, clinical presentation, histopathological data, diagnostic procedures, treatments and results of the pregnancy were identified. RESULTS: The mean (M +/- SD) age of gestational women was of 31.5 +/- 5.2 years; the 83.3% women received adyuvant chemotherapy with antraciclines; the patients with regional illness (> 4 N+) and advanced illness had an adverse presage; the systemic relapse and progression showed in 42.8% of the cases. The pregnancy to term was presented in half of the cases in the first two years and in a third part, later to the 2 years of having concluded the oncological treatment; of the fourteen patients with breast cancer presented a total of 16 pregnancies: 9 were of term, 3 of preterm and 4 abortions. CONCLUSIONS: The study founds are based on a series of cases, which do not suggest that the pregnancy after the diagnosis and treatment of breast cancer has some adverse effect in the patients survival, for what the patients can conceive later to the oncological treatment. However, in this study it was observed that the effect of the advanced stage and positive axillary ganglion (> 4) influence in the relapses.
  Current theory on the influence of breast cancer on bone describes metastasis of tumor cells to bone tissue, followed by induction of osteoclasts and bone degradation. Tumor influences on bone health in pre- or non-metastatic models are unknown.Female rats (n=48, 52 d old) were injected with N-methyl-N-nitrosourea to induce breast cancer. Animals were sacrificed 10 wks later and tumors weighed and histologically classified. Right femora were extracted for testing of bone mineral density (BMD) by dual x-ray absorptiometry (DXA), bone mechanical strength by 3-point bend and femoral neck bend testing and structure by micro computed tomography (µCT).Of 48 rats, 22 developed one or more tumors in response to MNU injection by 10 weeks. Presence of any tumor predicted significantly poorer bone health in 17 out of 28 measures. In tumored vs. non-tumored animals, BMD was adversely affected by 3%, force at failure of the femoral midshaft by 4%, force at failure of the femoral neck by 12%, and various trabecular structural parameters by 6 to 27% (all p <0.05). Similarly, greater tumor burden represented by total tumor weight adversely correlated with bone outcomes: r = -0.51 for BMD, -0.42 and -0.35 for femur midshaft force and work at failure and between 0.36 and 0.59 (absolute values) for trabecular architecture (all p < 0.05).Presence of MNU-induced tumors and total tumor burden showed a negative association with bone health of the femur in rats, in the absence of metastasis. Further study is required to elucidate mechanisms for this association. © 2010 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.
  BACKGROUND:: The purposes of this study were to address a persistent controversy as to whether the ER status of a primary tumor remains stable during progression to metastasis and to evaluate the influence of disease course and prior systemic therapy on ER status. METHODS:: Breast carcinomas from 227 women with known ER status in both primary tumor and paired metastasis were retrospectively reviewed. ER status was compared between primary and metastatic tumors with respect to metastatic site, interval between two ER assays, and intervening chemotherapy and endocrine therapy. Semiquantitative comparison of ER values was performed for 92 tumor pairs. RESULTS:: ER status agreed in 210 (92.5%) patients, including 147 positive and 63 negative. Of the 17 patients (7.5%) with discordant ER status, both negative to positive conversion (n = 7) and positive to negative conversion (n = 10) were observed. ER discordance was not significantly associated with metastatic site (locoregional vs distant), time interval between assays (<5 years vs. ≥5 years), or intervening chemotherapy and endocrine therapy. Semiquantitative levels of ER expression were similar between primary and metastatic tumors. In discordant cases, variations in testing methods and marginal scores were common. CONCLUSIONS:: ER status in breast carcinoma is generally stable during progression to metastasis. Preanalytical and analytical variability may contribute to discordance in some cases. Given the importance of ER status for clinical management, ER testing in metastatic breast carcinoma should be repeated, especially for patients whose clinical courses are not compatible with stated ER status. Cancer 2010. © 2010 American Cancer Society.
  BACKGROUND:: Few data are available on how race/ethnicity, insurance, and socioeconomic status (SES) interrelate to influence breast cancer treatment. The authors examined care for a national cohort of breast cancer patients to assess whether insurance and SES were associated with racial/ethnic differences in care. METHODS:: The authors used multivariate logistic regression to assess the probability of definitive locoregional therapy, hormone receptor testing, and adjuvant systemic therapy among 662,117 white, black, and Hispanic women diagnosed with invasive breast cancer during 1998-2005 at National Cancer Data Base hospitals. In additional models, the authors included insurance and area-level SES to determine whether these variables were associated with observed racial/ethnic disparities. RESULTS:: Most women were white (86%), 10% were black, and 4% were Hispanic. Most had private insurance (51%) or Medicare (41%). Among eligible patients, 80.0% (stage I/II) had definitive locoregional therapy, 98.5% (stage I-IV) had hormone receptor testing, and 53.1% and 50.2% (stage I-III) received adjuvant hormonal therapy and chemotherapy, respectively. After adjustment, black (vs white) women had less definitive locoregional therapy (odds ratio [OR], 0.91; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.88-0.94), hormonal therapy (OR, 0.90; 95% CI, 0.87-0.93), and chemotherapy (OR, 0.87; 95% CI, 0.84-0.91). Hispanic (vs white) women were also less likely to receive hormonal therapy. Hormone receptor testing did not differ by race/ethnicity. Racial disparities persisted despite adjusting for insurance and SES. CONCLUSIONS:: The modest association between black (vs white) race and guideline-recommended breast cancer care was insensitive to adjustment for insurance and area-level SES. Further study is required to better understand disparities and to ensure receipt of care. Cancer 2010. © 2010 American Cancer Society.
  Transmembrane proteins of the tetraspanin superfamily are implicated in a broad spectrum of cellular processes in many biological systems in both health and disease. Tetraspanins form specialized membrane microdomains on the cell surface which control cell proliferation and migration through various adhesion and growth factor receptors. Recent extensive research has shown that expression of various tetraspanins and their associated partners is deregulated in human malignancies. Although, for the most part, the degree of involvement of tetraspanins in carcinogenesis remains to be established, increasing evidence suggests that these proteins might be of clinical significance in at least some malignancies. Here we provide a comprehensive review of the existing data on expression of tetraspanins in breast cancer and other human epithelial tumours, with an emphasis on their value as potential prognostic markers. Copyright © 2010 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
  PURPOSE: Rational therapy planning should aim to minimize the rate of axillary lymph node dissection (ALND) in patients without metastatic disease. By the same token, the frequency of sentinel lymph node biopsies (SLNB) should not be unnecessarily high in patients with axillary node disease. Preoperative axillary ultrasonography is a generally available noninvasive technique for assessing nodal status. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Based on retrospective data, we analyzed the sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive value, and efficiency of preoperative ultrasonography US. A total of 429 axillary ultrasonographic examinations were included, and the management decisions were based on the ultrasonographic findings. Patients with suspicious US results were scheduled for ALND, while patients with unremarkable findings underwent SLNB. RESULTS: Axillary metastases were found in 146 of 429 (34 %) cases. In 75 of 429 (17 %) axillary examinations, ultrasonography revealed suspicious findings. In these cases, we proceeded with ALND, thereby reducing the number of SLNB by 17 %. 219 of 429 cases were classified correctly as not having metastasis, thus lowering the rate of ALND, which is associated with higher postoperative morbidity, by 51 %. Preoperative ultrasonography had a sensitivity of 53.6 %, specificity of 75.5 %, and a positive predictive value of 77.3 %. The negative predictive value was 51.3 % and the efficiency was 68.5 %. CONCLUSION: Ultrasonography is a moderately sensitive, but quite specific, preoperative method for assessing the axillary lymph nodes.
  PURPOSE: Mammography in screening or on indication is regarded as the gold standard for breast examination to detect breast cancer. The present study was performed to evaluate breast ultrasound examination (BU) as a supplement to physical breast examination in a gynecological office setting. MATERIALS AND METHODS: BU was performed concomitantly with all physical breast examinations in a gynecological clinic. The results of all BUs during a 10-year period using the patients' personal numbers were crossed with the Danish Cancer Registry and the Danish Pathology Data Bank. All new breast malignancies registered from the date of BU and 12 months later were included. RESULTS: A total of 3030 BUs of both breasts was performed in 1428 women. Twenty-eight new breast malignancies were registered in 27 patients. Physical examination did not reveal any tumors not detected by ultrasound. Sixteen of the 28 malignancies were non-palpable (57 %). BU detected 25 of these malignancies, thus yielding a sensitivity of 89 %. Mammography performed within 12 months of the diagnosis was negative in 11 patients resulting in a rate of 44 % of malignancies with a negative mammography result. The tumors measured an average of 11 mm (range 4 - 30 mm) using the largest diameter. CONCLUSION: BU offers substantial help for the detection of breast cancer. The sensitivity is high, and in a gynecological setting where ultrasound is used for almost every consultation, it is natural to use the scanner for the breast examination. Larger studies with evaluation of interobserver variability for tumor detection by ultrasound are needed.
  Breast cancer is the most common malignancy with the highest incidence among women in the world. Metastasis is the major reason for breast cancer-related deaths. The precise molecular circuitry that governs the metastasis process has not been completely understood. Discoveries of microRNAs (miRNAs) open a new avenue for cancer metastasis research. It has become clear that alterations of miRNA expression contribute to cancer pathogenesis. miRNAs control a wide array of physiological and pathological processes, including development, differentiation, cellular proliferation, programmed cell death, oncogenesis, and metastasis by modulating the expression of their cognate target genes through cleaving mRNA molecules or inhibiting their translation. Some miRNAs are associated with the invasive and metastatic phenotype of breast cancer cell lines or identified in metastatic tumor tissues and lymph nodes. Some miRNAs serve as metastasis suppressors and their expression is frequently downregulated or lost in both breast cancer cell lines and metastatic foci. Some miRNAs are considered to play key roles in the phenotype formation of breast cancer stem cells. This review will focus on recent discoveries related to the miRNAs involved in the metastasis of breast cancer and discuss the implications for the diagnosis, prognosis, and therapeutic strategies of breast cancer.
  Poor aqueous solubility limits the therapeutic index of paclitaxel as an anti-cancer drug. Synthesis of soluble prodrugs of paclitaxel, or conjugation of the drug to macromolecular carriers have been reported to increase its water-solubility. Macromolecular drug carriers have an added advantage of targeting the drug to the tumor site due to the abnormal tumor blood and lymphatic vasculature. This study describes a thermally responsive macromolecular carrier, elastin-like polypeptide (ELP) for the delivery of paclitaxel. Paclitaxel was bound to ELP by conjugation with the 6-maleimidocaproyl hydrazone derivative of paclitaxel, an acid-sensitive paclitaxel prodrug, for the potential treatment of breast cancer. Focused hyperthermia above a specific transition temperature at the site of a tumor causes ELP to aggregate and accumulate, thereby increasing the local concentration of the drug cargo. The paclitaxel prodrug described here bears an acid-sensitive linker that is cleavable at the lysosomal/endosomal pH, which allows a controlled intracellular release of the drug. The ELP-delivered paclitaxel in the presence of hyperthermia inhibits MCF-7 cell proliferation by stabilizing the microtubule structures, arresting the cells at the G2/M stage, and inducing apoptosis in a manner similar to conventional paclitaxel. It also inhibits proliferation of a paclitaxel resistant MCF-7 cell line. These data provide an in vitro proof of concept for the use of ELP as a delivery vehicle of paclitaxel.
  BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Fulvestrant, an oestrogen receptor (ER) antagonist with no known agonist effects, has shown activity in postmenopausal patients with ER-positive advanced breast cancer recurring or progressing following prior endocrine therapy. This double-blind, double-dummy, randomised phase III study (NCT00327769) was designed to compare the efficacy and safety of fulvestrant versus anastrozole in advanced breast cancer of Chinese postmenopausal women whose disease has progressed following prior endocrine treatment. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 234 patients were randomised to fulvestrant 250 mg/month (n = 121) or 1 mg/day anastrozole (n = 113), together with matching placebo. The primary endpoint was time to progression (TTP). Secondary endpoints included objective response rate (ORR), duration of response (DoR), clinical benefit rate (CBR) and time to treatment failure (TTF). RESULTS: Baseline characteristics were similar, with the possible exception that a higher number of fulvestrant patients had received two prior chemotherapy regimens. Median TTP was 110 days in the fulvestrant group versus 159 days in the anastrozole group (hazard ratio [HR], 1.314; 95% confidence intervals [CI], 0.948, 1.822; P = 0.101). ORR was 10% in the fulvestrant group and 14% in the anastrozole group. Median DoR from randomisation to progression was 436 days versus 432 days for the fulvestrant and anastrozole groups, respectively. CBR for fulvestrant (36.1%) versus anastrozole (48.2%) was not statistically different between the groups. TTF (110 days versus 147 days for the fulvestrant and anastrozole groups, respectively) was not statistically different between the treatments (HR, 1.307; 95% CI, 0.961, 1.778; P = 0.088). Both treatments were well tolerated, with only two patients treated with fulvestrant and four patients treated with anastrozole withdrawn from study treatment due to adverse events. CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate that fulvestrant 250 mg and anastrozole were similarly effective and well tolerated in the treatment of postmenopausal Chinese women with advanced breast cancer whose disease had progressed or recurred on prior endocrine treatment.
  This study presents the design and optimization for in vitro use of a new versatile chemotaxis device called the NANIVID (NANo IntraVital Imaging Device), developed using advanced nano/micro fabrication techniques. The device is fabricated using microphotolithographic techniques and two substrates are bonded together using a thin polymer layer creating a sealed device with one outlet. The main structure of the device consists of two Pyrex substrates: an etched chemoattractant reservoir and a top cover, with a final size of 0.2 × 2 × 3 mm. This reservoir contains a hydrogel blend with EGF which diffuses out through a small (∼9(.)10(3)μm(2)) outlet. This reservoir sustains a steady release of growth factor into the surrounding environment for several hours establishing a consistent concentration gradient from the device. The focus of this study was to design and optimize the new device for cell chemotaxis studies in breast cancer cells in cell culture. Our results show that we have created a flexible, cheap, miniature and autonomous chemotaxis device and demonstrate its usefulness in 2D and 3D cell culture. We also provide preliminary data for use of the device in vivo.
  Background Accurate estimates of cancer survival are important for assessing optimal patient care and prognosis. Evaluation of these estimates via relative survival (a ratio of observed and expected survival rates) requires a population life table that is matched to the cancer population by age, sex, race and/or ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and ideally risk factors for the cancer under examination. Because life tables for all subgroups in a study may be unavailable, we investigated whether cause-specific survival could be used as an alternative for relative survival. Methods We used data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program for 2 330 905 cancer patients from January 1, 1992, through December 31, 2004. We defined cancer-specific deaths according to the following variables: cause of death, only one tumor or the first of multiple tumors, site of the original cancer diagnosis, and comorbidities. Estimates of relative survival and cause-specific survival that were derived by use of an actuarial method were compared. Results Among breast cancer patients who were white, black, or of Asian or Pacific Islander descent and who were older than 65 years, estimates of 5-year relative survival (107.5%, 106.6%, and 103.0%, respectively) were higher than estimates of 5-year cause-specific survival (98.6%, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 98.4% to 98.8%; 97.4%, 95% CI = 96.2% to 98.2%; and 99.2%, 95% CI = 98.4%, 99.6%, respectively). Relative survival methods likely underestimated rates for cancers of the oral cavity and pharynx (eg, for white cancer patients aged ≥65 years, relative survival = 54.2%, 95% CI = 53.1% to 55.3%, and cause-specific survival = 60.1%, 95% CI = 59.1% to 60.9%) and the lung and bronchus (eg, for black cancer patients aged ≥65 years, relative survival = 10.5%, 95% CI = 9.9% to 11.2%, and cause-specific survival = 11.9%, 95% CI = 11.2 % to 12.6%), largely because of mismatches between the population with these diseases and the population used to derive the life table. Socioeconomic differences between groups with low and high status in relative survival estimates appeared to be inflated (eg, corpus and uterus socioeconomic status gradient was 13.3% by relative survival methods and 8.8% by cause-specific survival methods). Conclusion Although accuracy of the cause of death on a death certificate can be problematic for cause-specific survival estimates, cause-specific survival methods may be an alternative to relative survival methods when suitable life tables are not available.
  Breast cancer is one of the most frequent of human malignacies, and it is therefore fundamental to identify the underlying molecular mechanisms leading to cancer transformation. Among other causative agents in the development of breast cancers, an important role for reactive oxygen species (ROS) has emerged. However, most studies on the role of ROS in cancer have not reached specific conclusions, and many issues remain controversial. In the present study, we show that methionine sulfoxide reductase A (MsrA), which is known to protect proteins from oxidation and which acts as a ROS scavenger, is down-regulated in a number of breast cancers. Moreover, levels of MsrA correlate with advanced tumor grade. We therefore investigated the functional role of MsrA in breast cancer cells. Our data show that reduction of MsrA levels results in increased cell proliferation and extracellular matrix degradation, and consequently in a more aggressive cellular phenotype, both in vivo and in vitro. We also show that the underlying molecular mechanisms involve increased ROS levels, resulting in reduction of phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome ten protein (PTEN), and activation of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathway. In addition, MsrA down-regulation results in up-regulation of VEGF, providing additional support for tumor growth in vivo.
  The cell-fate determination factor Dachshund was cloned as a dominant inhibitor of the hyperactive epidermal growth factor (EGFR) ellipse. The expression of Dachshund is lost in human breast cancer associated with poor prognosis. Breast tumor initiating cells (BTIC) may contribute to tumor progression and therapy resistance. Herein endogenous DACH1 was reduced in breast cancer cell llines with high expression of TIC markers and in patient samples of the basal phenotype. Re-expression of DACH1 blocked breast tumor cell growth in vivo, reduced mammosphere formation and reduced the proportion of CD24low/CD44high breast tumor cells. Conversely, lentiviral shRNA to DACH1 increased the BTIC population. Genome wide expression studies of mammary tumors demonstrated DACH1 repressed a molecular signature associated with stem cells (SOX2, Nanog, KLF4) and genomic wide ChIP-seq analysis identified DACH1 binding to the promoter of the Nanog, KLF4, and Lin28 genes. KLF4/c-Myc and Oct4/Sox2 antagonized DACH1 repression of BTIC. Mechanistic studies demonstrated DACH1 directly repressed the Nanog and Sox2 promoters via a conserved domain. Endogenous DACH1 regulates BTIC in vitro and in vivo.
  Caspase activation is a hallmark of apoptosis. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the regulation of caspase-8 activation within the extrinsic death pathway are not well understood. In this study, we demonstrate that procaspase-8 is phosphorylated in mitotic cells by Cdk1/cyclin B1 on Ser-387, which is located at the N-terminus of the catalytic subunit p10. This phosphorylation of procaspase-8 on Ser-387 occurs in cancer cell lines as well as in primary breast tissues and lymphocytes. Furthermore, RNAi-mediated silencing of cyclin B1 or treatment with the Cdk1 inhibitor RO-3306 enhances the Fas-mediated activation and processing of procaspase-8 in mitotic cells. A non-phosphorylatable procaspase-8(S387A) facilitates Fas-induced apoptosis during mitosis. Our findings suggest that Cdk1/cyclin B1 activity shields human cells against extrinsic death stimuli and unravel the molecular details of the crosstalk between cell cycle and extrinsic apoptotic pathways. Finally, this new mechanism may also contribute to tumorigenesis.
  Resent studies have identified Pygopus as a core component of the β-catenin/T-cell factor (TCF)/lymphoid-enhancing factor 1 (LEF) transcriptional activation complex required for the expression of canonical Wg/Wnt target genes in Drosophila. However, the biochemical involvement of mammalian Pygopus proteins in β-catenin/TCF/LEF gene activation remains controversial. In this study, we perform a series of molecular/biochemical experiments to demonstrate that Pygo2 associates with histone modifying enzymatic complexes, specifically the MLL2 histone methytransferase (HMT) and STAGA histone acetyltransferase (HAT) complexes, to facilitate their interaction with β-catenin and to augment Wnt1-induced, TCF/LEF-dependent transcriptional activation in breast cancer cells. We identify a critical domain in Pygo2 encompassing the first 47 amino acids that mediates its HMT/HAT interaction. We further demonstrate the importance of this domain in Pygo2's ability to transcriptionally activate both artificial and endogenous Wnt target genes, and to expand breast cancer stem-like cells in culture. This work now links mechanistically Pygo2's role in histone modification to its enhancement of the Wnt-dependent transcriptional program and cancer stem-like cell expansion.
  The actin cross-linking protein filamin A (FLNa) functions as a scaffolding protein and couples cell cytoskeleton to extracellular matrix and integrin receptor signaling. In this study, we report that FLNa suppresses invasion of breast cancer cells and regulates focal adhesion (FA) turnover. Two large progression tissue microarrays from breast cancer patients revealed a significant decrease of FLNa levels in tissues from invasive breast cancer compared with benign disease and in lymph node-positive compared with lymph node-negative breast cancer. In breast cancer cells and orthotopic mouse breast cancer models, down-regulation of FLNa stimulated cancer cell migration, invasion, and metastasis formation. Time-lapse microscopy and biochemical assays after FLNa silencing and rescue with wild-type or mutant protein resistant to calpain cleavage revealed that FLNa regulates FA disassembly at the leading edge of motile cells. Moreover, FLNa down-regulation enhanced calpain activity through the mitogen-activated protein kinase-extracellular signal-regulated kinase cascade and stimulated the cleavage of FA proteins. These results document a regulation of FA dynamics by FLNa in breast cancer cells.
  Background: Tumors with homologous recombination deficiency (HRD), such as BRCA1-associated breast cancers, are not able to reliably repair DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) and are therefore highly sensitive to both DSB-inducing chemotherapy and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors. We have studied markers that may indicate the presence of HRD in HER2-negative breast cancers and related them to neoadjuvant chemotherapy response. Patients and methods: Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), BRCA1 promoter methylation, BRCA1 messenger RNA (mRNA) expression and EMSY amplification were assessed in 163 HER2-negative pretreatment biopsies from patients scheduled for neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Results: Features of BRCA1 dysfunction were frequent in triple-negative (TN) tumors: a BRCA1-like aCGH pattern, promoter methylation and reduced mRNA expression were observed in, respectively, 57%, 25% and 36% of the TN tumors. In ER+ tumors, a BRCA2-like aCGH pattern and the amplification of the BRCA2 inhibiting gene EMSY were frequently observed (43% and 13%, respectively) and this BRCA2-like profile was associated with a better response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Conclusions: Abnormalities associated with BRCA1 inactivation are present in about half of the TN breast cancers but were not predictive of chemotherapy response. In ER+/HER2- tumors, a BRCA2-like aCGH pattern was predictive of chemotherapy response. These findings should be confirmed in independent series.
  The authors prospectively examined the relation of fruit and vegetable intake to breast cancer risk among 51,928 women aged 21-69 years at enrollment in 1995 in the Black Women's Health Study. Dietary intake was assessed by using a validated food frequency questionnaire. Cox proportional hazards models were used to estimate incidence rate ratios and 95% confidence intervals, adjusted for breast cancer risk factors. During 12 years of follow-up, there were 1,268 incident cases of breast cancer. Total fruit, total vegetable, and total fruit and vegetable intakes were not significantly associated with overall risk of breast cancer. However, total vegetable consumption was associated with a decreased risk of estrogen receptor-negative/progesterone receptor-negative breast cancer (incidence rate ratio = 0.57, 95% confidence interval: 0.38, 0.85, for ≥2 servings/day relative to <4/week; P(trend) = 0.02). In addition, there was some evidence of inverse associations with breast cancer risk overall for cruciferous vegetable intake (P(trend) = 0.06) and for carrot intake (P(trend) = 0.02). Study findings suggest that frequent consumption of vegetables is inversely associated with risk of estrogen receptor-negative/progesterone receptor-negative breast cancer, and that specific vegetables may be associated with a decreased risk of breast cancer overall.
  Multiple-day diet records can be unsuitable for cohort studies because of high administrative and analytical costs. Costs could be reduced if a subsample of participants were analyzed in a nested case-control study. However, completed records are usually reviewed ("documented") with participants to correct errors and omissions before analysis. The authors evaluated the suitability of using undocumented 3-day food records in 2 samples of women in a Northern California cohort study of breast cancer survivorship (2006-2009). One group of participants (n = 130) received an introduction to the food record at enrollment, while another (n = 70) received more comprehensive instruction. Food records were mailed to participants 6 months later for follow-up and were analyzed as received and after phone documentation. Error rates for adequate completion were high in the first group but substantially lower among persons receiving instruction; prevalences of missing data on serving size and incomplete food descriptions changed from 30% to 4% and from 32% to 6%, respectively (P < 0.0001). Correlations between nutrient intakes calculated from undocumented and documented records were 0.72-0.93 in the first group and were significantly stronger (0.84-0.99) among persons receiving instruction. Documentation had little effect on intraclass correlation coefficients across days, but training increased the coefficients for many nutrients. When participants receive proper instruction, undocumented food records can be satisfactory for large epidemiologic studies.
  Maytansine and its analogues (maytansinoids) are potent microtubule-targeted compounds that inhibit proliferation of cells at mitosis. Antibody-maytansinoid conjugates consisting of maytansinoids (DM1 and DM4) attached to tumor-specific antibodies have shown promising clinical results. To determine the mechanism by which the antibody-DM1 conjugates inhibit cell proliferation, we examined the effects of the cleavable anti-EpCAM-SPP-DM1 and uncleavable anti-EpCAM-SMCC-DM1 conjugates on MCF7 human breast tumor cells. We also examined the effects of the free maytansinoids, maytansine and S-methyl DM1 (a version of DM1 that is stable in cell culture medium), for comparison. Both the conjugates and free maytansinoids potently inhibited MCF7 cell proliferation at nanomolar and subnanomolar concentrations, respectively, by arresting the cells in mitotic prometaphase/metaphase. Arrest occurred in concert with the internalization and intracellular processing of both conjugates under conditions that induced abnormal spindle organization and suppressed microtubule dynamic instability. Microtubule depolymerization occurred only at significantly higher drug concentrations. The results indicate that free maytansinoids, antibody-maytansinoid conjugates, and their metabolites exert their potent antimitotic effects through a common mechanism involving suppression of microtubule dynamic instability. Mol Cancer Ther; 9(10); 2700-13. ©2010 AACR.
  The role of infectious agents and chronic inflammation in carcinogenesis is being increasingly recognized. It has been estimated that about 18% of cancers are directly linked to infections, particularly gastric adenocarcinoma (Helicobacter pylori), cervical carcinoma (human papilloma viruses), and hepatocarcinoma (hepatitis B and C viruses). Multiple clinical trials of COX-2 inhibitors and other antiinflammatory agents have shown a beneficial effect on the development of diverse tumors, such as those of the colon, stomach, prostate, and breast. However, their mechanism of action is not completely understood and may differ among the infectious agents and tumor types. Because gastric adenocarcinomas account for more than 90% of all gastric malignancies, this review focuses on adenocarcinomas.
  Angiopoietin-1 (Ang-1) is a ligand for Tie-2 receptors and a promoter of angiogenesis. Angiogenesis plays an important role in breast cancer, as it is one of the critical events required for tumors to grow and metastasize. In this study, we investigated the influence of estradiol (E2) on the expression of angiopoietins in breast cancer cell lines. Ang-1 mRNA and protein expressions were significantly higher in estrogen receptor-negative (ERα-) breast cancer cells than in estrogen receptor-positive (ERα+) cells. Exposure of ERα+ cells to E2 resulted in further reductions of Ang-1 levels. In mouse mammary pads inoculated with breast cancer cells, both tumor size and Ang-1 production were significantly lower in ERα+ cell-derived xenografts, as compared to those derived from ERα- cells. Reduction of circulating levels of E2 by ovariectomy eliminated this response. Overall, these results indicate that Ang-1 mRNA and protein expressions: 1) negatively correlate with the level of ERα in breast cancer cell lines; 2) are downregulated by E2 in an ERα dependent manner; and 3) positively correlate with the degree of angiogenesis in-vivo. We conclude that Ang-1 is an important modulator of growth and progression of ERα- breast cancers.
  Tamoxifen is an antiestrogenic agent used widely in the treatment of estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer. However, hepatic steatosis has been reported during clinical trials of tamoxifen. To explore the mechanism responsible for this tamoxifen-induced hepatic steatosis, we used microarray analysis to profile the gene expression pattern of mouse liver after tamoxifen treatment. Tamoxifen was administered orally as a single dose of 10mg/kg (low dose), 50mg/kg (medium dose), or 100mg/kg (high dose) to C57BL/6 mice, and the livers were removed 2h, 4h, 8h, and 24h later. From microarray data obtained from the liver samples, 414 genes were selected as tamoxifen-responsive genes (P<0.05, two-way ANOVA; cutoff ≥ 1.5-fold response). These genes were classified into three groups: 308 of the 414 genes showed a time-dependent response, nine genes showed a dose-dependent response, and 97 genes showed a time- and dose-dependent response. Most of the 308 time-dependent-responsive genes were associated predominantly with the biological processes involved in lipid metabolism. Overrepresented transcription factor binding site analysis showed that the following nuclear receptors that are important in lipid and carbohydrate metabolism were overrepresented: the androgen receptor (AR), nuclear receptor subfamily 2 group F member 1 (NR2F1), hepatocyte nuclear factor 4α (HNF4α), and retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor alpha 1 (RORα1). Reporter gene analysis further revealed that tamoxifen repressed the 5α-dihydrotestosterone-induced activation of the AR and the intrinsic transactivation function of RORα1, HNF4α, and NR2F1. Taken together, these data provide a better understanding of the molecular mechanism underlying tamoxifen-induced steatogenic hepatotoxicity and useful information for predicting steatogenic hepatotoxicity.
  AIM: To isolate novel breast cancer antigen for developing cancer marker and vaccine, a phage display peptide library was screened with serum antibody from breast cancer patients. METHODS: A phage display peptide library was screened with serum IgG from six breast cancer patients, and then identified the positive clones by ELISA. According to the sequences of the positive clones, the synthesized oligonucleotides of one small peptide (P15) was cloned into PGEX-4T-1. Finally the fusion protein (GST-P15), which was purified from E.coli. BL21, was checked its binding activity with two kinds of serum antibodies (20 breast cancer patients and 20 normal people) by ELISA. RESULTS: 38 positive clones which specifically bound with serum IgG from breast cancer patients were screened. Some of these clones had the same DNA sequence. A small peptide (P15) and purified its fusion protein (GST-P15) was obtained successfully. ELISA assay showed GST-P15 had higher affinity with the serum antibody from breast cancer patients than with the normal serum and there was a significant difference (P<0.01). CONCLUSION: The peptide P15 can be recognized specifically by serum antibody from the breast cancer patients and they will be helpful for isolate new cancer antigen from breast cancer.
  INTRODUCTION Knowledge and understanding of disease can influence time to presentation and potentially, therefore, cancer survival rates. The media is one of the most important sources of public health information and it influences the awareness and perception of cancer. It is not known if the reportage of cancer by the media is representative to the true incidence of disease.MATERIALS AND METHODS The top 10 UK daily newspapers were assessed over a 1-year period for the 10 most common UK cancers via their on-line search facilities. RESULTS Of the 5832 articles identified, there was marked over-representation of breast, kidney and stomach cancer with ratios of prevalence to reporting of 1.4, 1.9 and 3.2 to 1, respectively. Colorectal, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, bladder and oesophageal cancers are all markedly under-represented with ratios of 0.4, 0.2, 0.6 and 0.4 to 1, respectively. CONCLUSIONS A policy of media advocacy by health professionals could enhance the information provided by the media and thus reflect the true extent of disease. A partnership between health professionals and journalists could result in articles that are relevant to the population, informative and in a style and format that is easily comprehendible. Targeted public health information could highlight the 'red-flag' symptoms and break down any stigma associated with cancer. This enhanced awareness could improve the health-seeking behaviour of the general population and reduce the delay from symptoms to diagnosis.
  BACKGROUND: Claudin-1 is a membrane protein of tight junctions, and is associated with the development of various cancers. However, the significance of claudin-1 expression in cancer cells is not well understood. Here, we showed for the first time the anti-apoptotic effect of claudin-1 in human breast cancer MCF-7 cells. METHODS: Human breast cancer MCF-7 and T47D cells were treated with or without tamoxifen, siRNA against claudin-1, or tamoxifen and claudin-1 siRNA. The samples were analyzed by RT-PCR, Western blotting or immunofluorescent staining. RESULTS: The expression of claudin-1 was upregulated in tamoxifen-treated MCF-7 cells, whereas the expression of claudin-1 was not altered in tamoxifen-treated T47D cells. Knockdown of claudin-1 by siRNA increased the amount of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) regardless of tamoxifen treatment in MCF-7 cells, but not T47D cells. In the cell membranes of the MCF-7 cells, tamoxifen treatment increased the amount of claudin-1, but decreased the amount of beta-catenin. Claudin-1 siRNA increased the amount of E-cadherin in the cytoplasm of the MCF-7 cells as well as the amount of beta-catenin in their cell membranes. CONCLUSION: These results indicate that claudin-1 has anti-apoptotic effects, and is involved in the regulation of the expression and subcellular localization of beta-catenin and E-cadherin in MCF-7, but not T47D cells.
  BACKGROUND: Correlation between circulating sex steroid levels and breast cancer has been controversial, with measurement of free, or bioavailable hormone rarely available. Salivary hormone levels represent the bioavailable fraction. To further elucidate the role of endogenous hormones in breast cancer, we aimed to assess correlation between salivary sex steroid levels and breast cancer prevalence. METHODS: Salivary hormone levels of testosterone (T), Estradiol (E2), Progesterone (P), Estriol (E3), Estrone (E1), DHEAS and Cortisol (C) were measured by Enzyme Immunoassay (EIA) in 357 women with histologically verified breast cancer and 184 age-matched control women. RESULTS: Salivary T and DHEAS levels were significantly lower in breast cancer cases vs. controls (27.2+13.9 vs. 32.2+17.5 pg/ml, p<0.001 for T and 5.3+4.3 vs. 6.4+4.5 ng/ml, p=0.007 for DHEAS). E2 and E1 levels were elevated and E3 levels were lowered in cases vs. controls. CONCLUSIONS: Salivary T levels, representing the bioavailable hormone, are significantly lower in women with breast cancer compared to age-matched control women. These findings support the protective role of biovailable testosterone in counteracting the proliferative effects of estrogens on mammary tissue.
  Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) constitute the most rapidly growing class of human therapeutics and the second largest class of drugs after vaccines. The treatment of B-cell malignancies and HER2/Neu(+) breast cancer has benefited considerably from the use of therapeutic mAbs, either alone or in combination with standard chemotherapy. Frequent relapses, however, demonstrate that the bioactivity of these mAbs is still suboptimal. The concept of improving the anti-tumor activity of mAbs is well established and potentiating the cytotoxicity induced by anticancer mAbs can be achieved by strategies that target the downstream cytolytic effector cells. The recruitment of Fcγ receptor-dependent functions appears well suited in this regard, because several lines of evidence suggest that enhancing antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) induced by therapeutic mAbs may directly improve their clinical efficacy. The cytolytic effector cells involved in ADCC are FcγR-expressing natural killer (NK) cells, but also γδ T cells can be amplified and finetuned for stronger ADCC activity. γδ T cells are raising a considerable interest in the immunotherapy community given their intrinsic antitumor activity that can be boosted by stimulation with synthetic phosphoantigens (PAgs), or with drugs that cause their accumulation into target cells, like aminobisphosphonates (N-BPs), and low doses interleukin (IL)-2. The field is interesting, and several papers have already explored this approach in solid and haematological malignancies. Thus, we propose that enhancing the efficacy of mAbs by combination with γδ T cell activation may have considerable therapeutic potential for a variety of malignancies, most especially for patients whose FcγR alleles impair ADCC.
  Calcitriol, the hormonally active form of vitamin D, is being evaluated in clinical trials as an anti-cancer agent. Calcitriol exerts multiple antiproliferative, proapoptotic, and pro-differentiating actions on various malignant cells and retards tumor growth in animal models of cancer. Calcitriol also exhibits several anti-inflammatory effects including suppression of prostaglandin (PG) action, inhibition of p38 stress kinase signaling, and the subsequent production of proinflammatory cytokines and inhibition of NF-&#x03BA;B signaling. Calcitriol also decreases the expression of aromatase, the enzyme that catalyzes estrogen synthesis in breast cancer, both by a direct transcriptional repression and indirectly by reducing PGs, which are major stimulators of aromatase transcription. Other important effects include the suppression of tumor angiogenesis, invasion, and metastasis. These calcitriol actions provide a basis for its potential use in cancer therapy and chemoprevention. We summarize the status of trials involving calcitriol and its analogs, used alone or in combination with known anti-cancer agents. Expected final online publication date for the Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology Volume 51 is January 06, 2011. Please see http://www.annualreviews.org/catalog/pubdates.aspx for revised estimates.
  Using a mild pressure stressing device and a pulsed ruby-laser system, we apply phase-shifted holographic interferometry to the detection of breast cancer. We compare a four-step algorithm and a Carré algorithm for their ability to evaluate the interferograms. The results show the feasibility of holographic interferometry in the detection of anomalies in the human female breast.
  AIMS AND OBJECTIVES: To explore the experiences of 12 women with breast cancer, involved in a large longitudinal qualitative study designed to explore the experiences of people with cancer within the first year following diagnosis. BACKGROUND: To understand experiences of breast cancer further as a chronic illness, this study draws on biographically informed and embodied perspectives of chronic illness. DESIGN: Qualitative, longitudinal study. METHOD: Interviews were conducted at three time-points within the first year following diagnosis with 12 women with breast cancer. Drawing on the constant comparative method, a descriptive and thematic approach to data analysis was adopted. To move beyond the descriptive level, we drew on the concepts of biographical disruption and embodiment to further explore and explain the disruption that was evident in these women’s lives as a result of their diagnosis. RESULTS: Two key concepts emerged from the data: ‘Identity Transition: moving between health and illness’ and ‘Making the Transition to the Future? Living with breast cancer and moving on’. Identity transition emerged as a result of the changes and adaptations participants were required to make as a result of their diagnosis. Making the transition to the future emerged as a result of the challenges these women faced living with cancer. CONCLUSIONS: This study showed that the longitudinal exploration of the experiences of cancer within the first year following diagnosis provides a vital understanding of the impact cancer can have on one’s identity from the moment of diagnosis onwards. RELEVANCE TO CLINICAL PRACTICE: This study has implications for cancer services because it highlights the need for interventions that support people to both successfully manage the experience of cancer diagnosis and treatment and equip themselves with the necessary techniques to negotiate transitions towards the future and living with cancer.
  We compared mitogenicity and intracellular signalling by human insulin and the AspB10 (X-10) human insulin analogue in MCF-7 human mammary adenocarcinoma cells. By flow analysis of phosphorylated histone H3 or cell cycle distributions, insulin and X-10 were mitogenic at physiologically relevant concentrations (2 nm to 74 pm range), with X-10 being approximately 3-fold more mitogenic than insulin. By western blotting with phospho-specific antibodies, insulin induced phosphorylation of IRS-1, Akt, p70S6K, S6 ribosomal protein, 4E-BP1, FoxO3a, FoxO1, p44/42 MAPK and the EGFR. Blocking with wortmannin, rapamycin and U0126 showed that these signalling events conformed to the canonical PI3K pathway. IRS-1 (Ser302) phosphorylation was abolished by wortmannin and rapamycin, suggesting a feedback from the PI3K pathway on insulin signalling. Compared with equimolar insulin, X-10 caused up to 2-fold higher phosphorylation of all proteins examined in this study. The phosphorylation sites that responded most strongly to insulin were not generally the same as those responding most strongly to X-10. In the PI3K pathway, the most X-10-sensitive protein localized to the translation-regulating arm (p70S6K), with FoxO3a and FoxO1 transcription factors showing a more comparable response to insulin and X-10. Using flow analysis, we confirmed the correlation between insulin-triggered translational activation in G0/G1 (S6 phosphorylation) and S-phase entry by MCF-7 cells. In summary, our findings implicate asymmetrical PI3K pathway activation and specifically stimulation of protein translation in the hypermitogenic effect of insulin analogues such as X-10. It remains to be shown whether these findings are relevant to other human mammary cancer cell types. Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
  This study investigated the association between supportive and collaborative processes and dyadic adjustment in 94 women at increased risk of breast/ovarian cancer and their partners. Participants were recruited through two familial cancer clinics. They completed mailed, self-report questionnaires that included measures of psychological distress, dyadic adjustment (consensus, cohesion and satisfaction) and couple predictor variables (perceived support and team approach). Most couples reported average-to-high levels of consensus, cohesion and satisfaction, with a small proportion of couples (6.4%) reporting scores that reached clinically significant levels of dyadic distress. Greater perceived support was associated with better dyadic consensus and satisfaction, and dyadic cohesion and satisfaction were higher among couples who reported greater use of a team approach. General distress did not moderate the association between dyadic coping and relationship quality. There were no significant relationships between intra-couple congruence on support or team approach, and dyadic adjustment. Most couples had a functional relationship in the face of the current health stressor, although a subgroup may be at elevated risk of negative psychological consequences, including further relationship strain. The results highlight that dyadic coping strategies are important factors involved in the quality of couples' relationship following genetic counselling for breast/ovarian cancer risk.
  The ATP-binding cassette transporter breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP/ABCG2) is supposed to be a major determinant of the multidrug resistance phenotype of tumors by extruding chemically diverse cytostatic drugs out of tumor cells. BCRP physically and possibly also functionally interacts with caveolin-1 (CAV1, encoded by Cav1), an integral membrane protein of lipid rafts important for signal transduction and membrane trafficking. Moreover, Cav1 is linked to an aggressive phenotype of cancer cells in various tumors. We therefore investigated whether Cav1 plays a functional role in the regulation of BCRP transport activity and in the resistance against chemotherapeutics that are BCRP substrates. As a cell model, we used the BCRP overexpressing cell line MDCKII-BCRP and the corresponding parental cell line MDCKII as a control. Cav1 expression was down-regulated using retrovirus-mediated RNA interference technology. BCRP activity was assessed by pheophorbide A efflux assay and the resistance towards cytostatic drugs was measured by proliferation assays. Efficient knockdown of Cav1 reduced Cav1 expression by 85-95% and BCRP activity by 35%. Concurrently, it reduced resistance towards the BCRP substrate mitoxantrone but not towards vincristine, a chemotherapeutic that is not extruded by BCRP. Western blot analysis of gradient ultracentrifugation fractions and immunofluorescence demonstrates that BCRP localization within the plasma membrane was largely unaltered in Cav1-deficient cells compared to controls. The diminished BCRP function after Cav1 knockdown is, thus, likely mediated by alterations in protein-protein interactions and suggests a positive regulation of BCRP function by CAV1.
  INTRODUCTION: We examined race/ethnic differences in treatment-related job loss and the financial impact of treatment-related job loss, in a population-based sample of women diagnosed with breast cancer. METHODS: Three thousand two hundred fifty two women with non-metastatic breast cancer diagnosed (August 2005-February 2007) within the Los Angeles County and Detroit Metropolitan Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results registries, were identified and asked to complete a survey (mean time from diagnosis = 8.9 months). Latina and African American women were over-sampled (n = 2268, eligible response rate 72.1%). RESULTS: One thousand one hundred eleven women (69.6%) of working age (<65 years) were working for pay at time of diagnosis. Of these women, 10.4% (24.1% Latina, 10.1% African American, 6.9% White, p < 0.001) reported that they lost or quit their job since diagnosis due to breast cancer or its treatment (defined as job loss). Latina women were more likely to experience job loss compared to White women (OR = 2.0, p = 0.013)), independent of sociodemographic factors. There were no significant differences in job loss between African American and White women, independent of sociodemographic factors. Additional adjustments for clinical and treatment factors revealed a significant interaction between race/ethnicity and chemotherapy (p = 0.007). Among women who received chemotherapy, Latina women were more likely to lose their job compared to White women (OR = 3.2, p < 0.001), however, there were no significant differences between Latina and White women among those who did not receive chemotherapy. Women who lost their job were more likely to experience financial strain (e.g. difficulty paying bills 27% vs. 11%, p < 0.001). CONCLUSION: Job loss is a serious consequence of treatment for women with breast cancer. Clinicians and staff need to be aware of aspects of treatment course that place women at higher risk for job loss, especially ethnic minorities receiving chemotherapy.
  Complete axillary lymph node dissection has been the traditional operation to determine whether cancer has spread beyond the breast. In the large majority of patients with breast cancer, lymphatic mapping and γ-probe-guided and/or blue dye sentinel node biopsy can be used to locate the first node in the axilla, and thereby provide important information about the status of axillary nodes. Patients without clinical involvement of the axilla should undergo sentinel node biopsy routinely. Thus, they may be spared complete axillary dissection if the sentinel node is negative. Decreased arm swelling and pain are associated with sentinel lymph node biopsy compared with axillary lymph node dissection.
  The human homolog of the Drosophila Scribble (SCRIB) tumor suppressor gene encodes a protein that regulates apical-basolateral polarity in mammalian epithelia and controls cell proliferation. Due to the role of cell polarity proteins in human cancers, we investigated whether genetic variability in SCRIB impacts breast carcinogenesis and tumor pathology. Five genetic variants were analyzed for an association with breast cancer risk and histopathological tumor parameters using a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) tagging approach. Genotyping of five tag SNPs was performed by TaqMan(®) allelic discrimination and RFLP-based PCR using the GENICA population-based breast cancer case-control collection including 1,021 cases and 1,015 age-matched controls. Odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated by ordinal logistic regression. None of the tag SNPs was associated with breast cancer risk or tumor characteristics. Our findings suggest that genetic variability in the SCRIB polarity gene does not contribute to breast cancer development.
  Lapatinib and capecitabine combination therapy is effective in trastuzumab-resistant human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-positive breast cancer. We investigated the biomarkers from serum of patients receiving lapatinib and capecitabine Patients received lapatinib 1,250 mg once daily and capecitabine 2,000 mg/m(2)/day, day 1-14, every 3 weeks. Serum samples were obtained before treatment initiation. Levels of transforming growth factor-α (TGF-α), epidermal growth factor (EGF), extracellular domains of EGFR and HER2 were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The effect of TGF-α on in vitro sensitivity of SK-BR-3 cells to lapatinib was investigated. Sixty-four patients were included. Response rate was significantly higher in patients with low serum TGF-α (≤3.75 pg/ml) compared to high TGF-α (>3.75 pg/ml) [61.1% (11/18) vs. 17.4% (8/46), respectively; P = 0.001]. Low serum TGF-α was independently associated with better response in multivariate analysis [adjusted odds ratio, 8.96; 95% confidence interval (CI) 2.4-34.2]. Time-to-progression tended to be shorter in patients with high serum TGF-α compared to low TGF-α [median 3.8 months (95% CI 2.3-5.4) vs. 6.5 (95% CI 6.1-6.8), respectively; P = 0.067]. We confirmed that TGF-α diminished the sensitivity of SK-BR3-cells to lapatinib in vitro. The in vitro antiproliferative effect of cetuximab in combination with lapatinib was higher than that of lapatinib alone in SK-BR3-cells exposed to TGF-α. These data suggest that TGF-α plays a role in resistance to lapatinib and capecitabine therapy among HER2-positive breast cancer.
  The outlook for metastatic melanoma to the brain is dismal. New therapeutic avenues are therefore needed. The anti-metastatic mechanisms that may underpin the effects of low molecular weight heparins (LMWHs) in in vitro and preclinical melanoma models warrant translating to a clinical setting. This review outlines a rationale that supports our proposal that metastatic melanoma to the brain is a clinical setting in which to study the anti-metastatic potential of LMWHs. Prevention or delay of brain metastases in melanoma is a clinically relevant and measurable target. Studies to explore the effect of anticoagulants on cancer survival are underway in other malignancies such as lung, pancreas, ovary, breast, and stomach cancer. However, no study to our knowledge has a methodology that could produce clinical evidence in support of a mechanism for whatever benefit may be seen. The setting we propose would allow translation of the molecular knowledge of the metastatic pathways mediated by platelets and the selectins-all potential targets of heparin-in a "time to appearance" of brain metastases endpoint. Since brain metastases are so common and they have a singularly adverse impact on survival, the "biological neuroprotection" model we propose in metastatic melanoma could provide the translational evidence to support the benefit of LMWHs in melanoma. More significantly, this would open the door to a wider "anti-metastatic" approach that could have much greater impact in patients with minimal disease being treated in adjuvant settings for the more common malignancies such as breast and colon cancer.
  BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to evaluate the need of axillary staging in breast cancer patients showing exclusive lymphatic drainage to the internal mammary chain (IMC). METHODS: A total of 2203 patients treated for breast carcinoma in three participating hospitals between July 2001 and July 2008 were analyzed. Only patients showing drainage to the IMC on preoperative lymphoscintigraphy were included. The number of harvested IMC sentinel lymph nodes (SLNs), axillary SLNs, and metastases were recorded. Finally, the follow-up of this group of patients was analyzed. RESULTS: In 25/426 patients, drainage was exclusively to the IMC. Exploration of the axilla resulted in the harvesting of blue SLNs in 9 patients (36%) and the retrieval of an enlarged lymph node in 1 patient. In 4 of the remaining 15 patients, an axillary lymph node dissection (ALND) was done. Lymph node metastases were found in 3 patients who had blue axillary SLNs and in 1 patient who underwent ALND. In the 11 patients who had no blue SLNs and no ALND, no axillary recurrences were observed during follow-up (median = 26 months). CONCLUSIONS: Proper staging of the axilla remains crucial in patients showing exclusive drainage to the IMC. When no axillary node can be retrieved, ALND remains subject to discussion.
  Interaction of nanoparticles with human cells is an interesting topic for understanding toxicity and developing potential drug candidates. Water soluble platinum nanoparticles were synthesized via reduction of hexachloroplatinic acid using sodium borohydride in the presence of capping agents. The bioactivity of folic acid and poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) capped platinum nanoparticles (Pt-nps) has been investigated using commercially available cell lines. In the cell viability experiments, PVP-capped nanoparticles were found to be less toxic (>80% viability), whereas, folic acid-capped platinum nanoparticles showed a reduced viability down to 24% after 72 h of exposure at a concentration of 100 μg ml(-1) for MCF7 breast cancer cells. Such toxicity, combined with the possibility to incorporate functional organic molecules as capping agents, can be used for developing new drug candidates.
  Breast cancer is a growing concern in low- and middle-income countries (LMCs). We explore community health worker (CHW) programs and describe their potential use in LMCs. We use South Africa as an example of how CHWs could improve access to breast health care because of its middle-income status, existing cancer centers, and history of CHW programs. CHWs could assume three main roles along the cancer control continuum: health education, screening, and patient navigation. By raising awareness about breast cancer through education, women are more likely to undergo screening. Many more women can be screened resulting in earlier-stage disease if CHWs are trained to perform clinical breast exams. As patient navigators, CHWs can guide women through the screening and treatment process. It is suggested that these roles be combined within existing CHW programs to maximize resources and improve breast cancer outcomes in LMCs.
  It is prevailingly thought that estrogen signaling is not involved in development of estrogen receptor (ER)-negative breast cancer. However, there is evidence indicating that ovariectomy prevents the development of both ER-positive and -negative breast cancer, suggesting that estrogen signaling is involved in the development of ER-negative breast cancer. Previously, our laboratory cloned a variant of ER-α, ER-α36, and found that ER-α36 mediated nongenomic estrogen signaling and is highly expressed in ER-negative breast cancer cells. In this study, we found that ER-α36 was highly expressed in 10/12 cases of triple-negative breast cancer. We investigated the role of mitogenic estrogen signaling mediated by ER-α36 in malignant growth of triple-negative breast cancer MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-436 cells that express high levels of ER-α36 and found that these cells strongly responded to mitogenic estrogen signaling both in vitro and in vivo. Knockdown of ER-α36 expression in these cells using the small hairpin RNA method diminished their responsiveness to estrogen. ER-α36 physically interacted with the EGFR/Src/Shc complex and mediated estrogen-induced phosphorylation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and Src. EGFR signaling activated ER-α36 transcription through an AP1 site in the ER-α36 promoter, and ER-α36 expression was able to stabilize EGFR protein. Our results, thus demonstrated that ER-α36 mediates nongenomic estrogen signaling through the EGFR/Src/ERK signaling pathway in ER-negative breast cancer cells and suggested that a subset of ER-negative breast tumors that expresses ER-α36, retains responsiveness to mitogenic estrogen signaling.Oncogene advance online publication, 11 October 2010; doi:10.1038/onc.2010.458.
  Breast cancer metastasis suppressor 1 (BRMS1) has been reported to suppress metastasis without significantly affecting tumorigenicity in breast cancer and ovarian cancer. To investigate the role of BRMS1 in human melanoma progression and prognosis, we established tissue microarray and BRMS1 expression was evaluated by immunohistochemistry in 41 dysplastic nevi, 90 primary melanomas and 47 melanoma metastases. We found that BRMS1 expression was significantly decreased in metastatic melanoma compared with primary melanoma or dysplastic nevi (P=0.021 and 0.001, respectively, χ(2) test). In addition, reduced BRMS1 staining was significantly correlated with American Joint Committee on Cancer stages (P=0.011, χ(2) test), but not associated with tumor thickness, tumor ulceration and other clinicopathological parameters. Furthermore, BRMS1 expression was significantly correlated with disease-specific 5-year survival of melanoma patients (P=0.007, log-rank test). Multivariate Cox regression analysis revealed that BRMS1 staining was an independent prognostic factor for melanoma patients (relative risk=0.51; confidence interval=0.29-0.91; P=0.022). Moreover, we demonstrated that BRMS1 overexpression inhibited endothelial cell growth and tube formation ability by suppressing NF-κB activity and IL-6 expression in vitro. We also showed that knockdown of BRMS1 increased IL-6 expression and promoted endothelial cell growth and tube formation. In addition, our data revealed that the BRMS1-mediated IL-6 expression is dependent on NF-κB. Strikingly, our in vivo studies using nude mice confirmed that BRMS1 inhibited blood vessel formation and the recruitment of CD31-positive cells in matrigel plugs. Taken together, BRMS1 expression was decreased in metastatic melanomas, which resulted in deficient suppression of angiogenesis and contributed to melanoma progression. BRMS1 may serve an important prognostic marker and therapeutic target for melanoma patients.Oncogene advance online publication, 11 October 2010; doi:10.1038/onc.2010.470.
  BACKGROUND: Despite many one- or two-modal attempts to relieve postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) and pain, postoperative issues following breast cancer surgery remain a substantial problem. Therefore, the aim of this explorative, hypothesis-generating study was to evaluate the effect of a multimodal, opiate-sparing, evidence-based regimen for prevention of PONV and pain. METHODS: Two hundred consecutive patients scheduled for breast cancer surgery were included. The prevention regimen included a package consisting of preoperative paracetamol, dextromethorphan, celecoxib, gabapentin, dexamethasone, total intravenous anaesthesia and intraoperative ondansetron. The patients were prospectively scored according to PONV, pain during rest and mobilization and major side effects. RESULTS: Of 200 consecutive breast cancer patients, 191 received the full package. During the first 36 postoperative hours, 79.1% reported no PONV at all and only 3.7% reported severe PONV. At rest, 69.6% reported no or light pain and 3.1% reported severe pain, with corresponding values of 59.7% and 8.9% during arm mobilization. Mean postoperative morphine consumption was 2.2 mg. The only significant side effect was transient dizziness. CONCLUSION: A multimodal, opiate-sparing regimen to prevent pain and PONV seems to be more effective than one- or two-component regimens on PONV and pain after breast cancer surgery, a result which calls for large-scale multi-center or randomized studies.
  PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review summarizes epidemiological data linking the fatty acid desaturation index measured in blood lipids, as a biomarker of hepatic stearoyl-CoA desaturase activity, the key enzyme involved in the synthesis of monounsaturated fatty acids from saturated fatty acids, to breast cancer risk. The biological plausibility of this association is discussed. RECENT FINDINGS: Epidemiological cohort studies reported an association between a high saturated to monounsaturated fatty acid ratio measured in blood lipids, indicating low stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 activity, and decreased breast cancer risk. The suppression of stearoyl-CoA desaturase expression reduces cancer cell proliferation and in-vitro invasiveness, and dramatically impairs tumor formation and growth. These effects could not be overcome by supplying exogenous monounsaturated fatty acids. SUMMARY: Epidemiological findings, in accordance with experimental data, suggested that decreased hepatic stearoyl-CoA desaturase expression/activity may be related to decreased risk of breast cancer.
  Postmenopausal women show the highest incidence of breast cancer in the female population and are often affected by metabolic syndrome. Metabolic syndrome (MS)-characterized by central adiposity, insulin resistance, low serum high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), high serum triglyceride and high blood pressure-seems to be strictly correlated to breast carcinogenesis. We enrolled 777 healthy women and women with breast cancer in our nested casecontrol study to evaluate the association between MS and breast cancer, analyzing anthropometric parameters (weight, height, BMI, waist and hip circumference), blood pressure, serum HDL-C, triglyceride, fasting plasma glucose, insulin, testosterone and uric acid levels and administering a questionnaire about physical activity, food intake, tobacco use, alcohol abuse, personal and familial history of disease. We found an higher prevalence of metabolic syndrome (30%) in postmenopausal breast cancer patients compared to healthy women (19%). None of the individual MS features was strong enough to be considered responsible for breast carcinogenesis alone. However, of the 63 postmenopausal breast cancer cases associated to MS, 30% presented three or more MS features, suggesting that the activation of multiple molecular pathways underlying MS might contribute to tumorigenesis. Our data support the hypothesis that MS may be an indicator of breast cancer risk in postmenopausal women. The unsettlement of the hormonal arrangement in postmenopausal, along with an increase in visceral adiposity, probably favour the hormone-dependent cell proliferation, which drives tumorigenesis. Adjustments in lifestyle with physical activity intensification and healthy diet could represent modifiable factors for the primary prevention of sporadic breast cancer.

  Background Cancer stem cells are presumed to have virtually unlimited proliferative and self-renewal abilities and to be highly resistant to chemotherapy, a feature that is associated with overexpression of ATP-binding cassette transporters. We investigated whether prolonged continuous selection of cells for drug resistance enriches cultures for cancer stem-like cells. Methods Cancer stem cells were defined as CD44+/CD24- cells that could self-renew (ie, generate cells with the tumorigenic CD44+/CD24- phenotype), differentiate, invade, and form tumors in vivo. We used doxorubicin-selected MCF-7/ADR cells, weakly tumorigenic parental MCF-7 cells, and MCF-7/MDR, an MCF-7 subline with forced expression of ABCB1 protein. Cells were examined for cell surface markers and side-population fractions by microarray and flow cytometry, with in vitro invasion assays, and for ability to form mammospheres. Xenograft tumors were generated in mice to examine tumorigenicity (n = 52). The mRNA expression of multidrug resistance genes was examined in putative cancer stem cells and pathway analysis of statistically significantly differentially expressed genes was performed. All statistical tests were two-sided. Results Pathway analysis showed that MCF-7/ADR cells express mRNAs from ABCB1 and other genes also found in breast cancer stem cells (eg, CD44, TGFB1, and SNAI1). MCF-7/ADR cells were highly invasive, formed mammospheres, and were tumorigenic in mice. In contrast to parental MCF-7 cells, more than 30% of MCF-7/ADR cells had a CD44+/CD24- phenotype, could self-renew, and differentiate (ie, produce CD44+/CD24- and CD44+/CD24+ cells) and overexpressed various multidrug resistance-linked genes (including ABCB1, CCNE1, and MMP9). MCF-7/ADR cells were statistically significantly more invasive in Matrigel than parental MCF-7 cells (MCF-7 cells = 0.82 cell per field and MCF-7/ADR = 7.51 cells per field, difference = 6.69 cells per field, 95% confidence interval = 4.82 to 8.55 cells per field, P < .001). No enrichment in the CD44+/CD24- or CD133+ population was detected in MCF-7/MDR. Conclusion The cell population with cancer stem cell characteristics increased after prolonged continuous selection for doxorubicin resistance.
  Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4a) is a liver-enriched master regulator of liver function. HNF4a is important in regulating hepatic expression of certain cytochrome P450s. The purpose of this study was to use mice lacking HNF4a expression in liver (HNF4a-HNull) to elucidate the role of HNF4a in regulating hepatic expression of phase-II enzymes and transporters in mice. Compared to male wild-type mice, HNF4a-HNull male mouse livers had: 1) markedly lower mRNAs encoding the uptake transporters sodium taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide (Ntcp), organic anion transporting polypeptide 1a1 (Oatp1a1), Oatp2b1, organic anion transporter 2, sodium phosphate cotransporter type 1, sulfate anion transporter 1, sodium-dependent vitamin C transporter 1, the phase-II enzymes UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 2a3 (Ugt2a3), Ugt2b1, Ugt3a1, Ugt3a2, sulfotransferase 1a1 (Sult1a1), Sult1b1, Sult5a1, the efflux transporters multidrug resistance-associated protein 6 (Mrp6) and multidrug and toxin extrusion 1; 2) moderately lower mRNAs encoding Oatp1b2, organic cation transporter 1, Ugt1a5, Ugt1a9, glutathione S-transferase m4 (Gstm4), Gstm6, and breast cancer resistance protein; but 3) higher mRNAs encoding Oatp1a4, organic cation transporter n2, Ugt1a1, Sult1e1, Sult2a2, Gsta4, Gstm1-m3, multidrug resistance protein 1a (Mdr1a), Mrp3, and Mrp4. Hepatic signaling of nuclear factor-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) and Pregnane X receptor appear to be activated in HNF4a-HNull mice. In conclusion, HNF4a deficiency markedly alters hepatic mRNA expression of a large number of phase-II enzymes and transporters, probably due to the loss of HNF4a, which is a transactivator and a determinant of gender-specific expression, and/or adaptive activation of signaling pathways important in hepatic regulation of these phase-II enzymes and transporters.
  OBJECTIVE: The objective is to systematically estimate the current cancer incidence and mortality from the six leading cancer types globally and by sub-regions resulting from exposure to known risk factors such as tobacco use, elevated body weight, alcohol consumption, inadequate physical activity, unhealthy diet and infections. METHODS: Cancer incidence, mortality and burden of disease caused by the main cancer risk factors were calculated using comparative risk assessment methods and updated data on mortality and risks. RESULTS: Lung cancer was the most common cancer in men and breast cancer the most common cancer in women, both in terms of incidence and mortality. The five leading behavioral and dietary risks-high body mass index, low fruit and vegetable intake, physical inactivity, tobacco use and alcohol use-were responsible for 24% of new cancer cases and 30% of cancer deaths. Cancers with the largest proportions attributable to preventable risk factors were cervical cancer (100%) and lung cancer (71%). Seventy percent of liver cancers and 60% of stomach cancers were due to infectious agents. A higher proportion of cancer deaths was attributed to infections in low- and middle-income than in high-income countries. CONCLUSIONS: The cancer burden is driven by changes in exposure to influential risk factors and can be influenced by preventive interventions aimed at reducing these exposures.
  BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: To measure the distance between surgical clips and edge of CT-defined seroma in a coronal plane in women who have undergone wide local excision of breast cancer and to evaluate dosimetric coverage of CT-defined boost volumes by conventional clip-based electron fields. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Planning CT images of 30 lumpectomy cavities from 30 patients were reviewed. All seroma cavities had at least 4 clips and Cavity Visualization Score ⩾3. Distances between clips and seroma edge (D(c-s)) were measured at the radial margins for each patient. Clips-based electron fields were generated by including all the clips with 2cm margin in the coronal plane and three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy plans (3D-CRT) were devised based on CT tumor beds (CT-TBs). The parameters of dose-volume histogram between the two boost treatment plans were analyzed. RESULTS: The mean seroma edge extended beyond the clips by 0.3-0.5cm. In all 120 D(c-s)s, 76.7% were ⩽0.5cm, 8.3% were >1cm and 15% were between 0.5 and 1cm. Twenty patients (20/30) had D(c-smax) (The maximal D(c-s) of each patient)>0.5cm and 7 patients had D(c-smax)>1cm. With the electron fields, only 46.7% (14/30) had D(90) (The minimal dose received by 90% of the planning target volume (PTV))>90% and geographical miss (any portion of the PTV receiving <50% of the prescribed dose) was found in 36.7% (11/30). D(c-smax)>0.5cm was associated with D(90)<90% (P<0.001) and >1cm was associated with geographic miss (P=0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Surgical clips are not always consistent with the edge of seroma. Electron boost field based on clips leads to insufficient dose coverage to the CT-TB. 3D-CRT planning should be considered to ameliorate the dose coverage to the tumor bed.
  The present investigation reports on the conditions for preparation of tamoxifen loaded PLGA nanoparticles (Tmx-NPs) for oral administration. Tmx-NPs with >85% entrapment efficiency and 165.58 ± 3.81 nm particle size were prepared and freeze dried. Freeze dried Tmx-NPs were found to be stable in various simulated GIT media (pH 1.2, pH 3.5, pH 6.8, SGF & SIF). No significant changes in characteristics of Tmx-NPs were observed after 3 months accelerated stability studies. The cell viability in C127I cells was found to be relatively lower in Tmx-NP treated cells as compared to free Tmx treated cells. CLSM imaging reveled that nanoparticles were efficiently localized into the nuclear region of C127I cells. Oral bioavailability of Tmx was increased by 3.84 and 11.19 times as compared to the free Tmx citrate and Tmx base respectively, when formulated in NPs. In vivo oral antitumor efficacy of Tmx-NPs was carried out in DMBA induced breast tumor model and tumor size was reduced up to 41.56% as compared to untreated groups which showed an increase in tumor size up to 158.66%. Finally, Tmx-NPs showed the marked reduction in hepatotoxicty when compared with free Tmx citrate as evidenced by histopathological examination of liver tissue as well as AST, ALT and MDA levels. Therefore Tmx-NPs could have the significant value for the oral chronic breast cancer therapy with reduced hepatotoxicity.
  Substantial evidence suggests that catechol estrogen-3,4-quinones, react with DNA to form predominantly the depurinating adducts, 4-hydroxyestrone(estradiol)-1-N3Ade [4-OHE(1)(E(2))-1-N3Ade] and 4-OHE(1)(E(2))-1-N7Gua. Apurinic sites resulting from these adducts generate critical mutations that can initiate cancer. The paradigm of cancer initiation is based on imbalancing estrogen metabolism between activating pathways that lead to estrogen-DNA adducts and deactivating pathways that lead to estrogen metabolites and conjugates. This balance can be improved to minimize formation of adducts by using antioxidants, such as resveratrol (Resv) and N-acetylcysteine (NAcCys). To compare the ability of Resv and NAcCys to block formation of estrogen-DNA adducts, we used the human breast epithelial cell line MCF-10F treated with 4-OHE(2). Resv and NAcCys directed metabolism of 4-OHE(2) toward protective pathways. NAcCys reacted with the quinones and reduced the semiquinones to catechols. The latter pathway was also carried out by Resv. In addition, Resv induced the protective enzyme quinone reductase, which reduces E(1)(E(2))-3,4-quinones to 4-OHE(1)(E(2)). Resv was more effective in increasing the amount of 4-OCH(3)E(1)(E(2)) than NAcCys. Inhibition of estrogen-DNA adduct formation was similar at lower doses, but at higher doses Resv was about 50% more effective than NAcCys. Their combined effects were additive. Therefore, these two antioxidants provide an excellent combination to protect catechol estrogens from oxidation to catechol quinones.
  The synthesis of Silicalites and Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles (MSN), which covalently incorporate original water-soluble photosensitizers for PDT applications is described. PDT was performed on MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. All the nanoparticles showed significant cell death after irradiation, which was not correlated with (1)O(2) quantum yield of the nanoparticles. Other parameters are involved and in particular the surface and shape of the nanoparticles which influence the pathway of endocytosis. Functionalisation with mannose was necessary to obtain the best results with PDT due to an active endocytosis of mannose-functionalized nanoparticles. The quantity of mannose on the surface should be carefully adjusted as a too high amount of mannose impairs the phototoxicity of the nanoparticles. Fluorescein was also encapsulated in MCM-41 type MSN in order to localize the nanoparticles in the organelles of the cells by confocal microscopy. The MSN were localized in lysosomes after active endocytosis by mannose receptors.
  OBJECTIVE: There is much research describing cancer patients' information needs and their use of the Internet, print media, and other sources to fulfill these needs. Yet little is known about whether patients with different types of cancer vary in their information needs and seeking behaviors. This study used population-based data to address this question. METHODS: A sample was randomly drawn from the list of patients with breast, prostate, or colorectal cancer reported to the Pennsylvania Cancer Registry in 2005. Patients completed a mail survey (N=2010); respective response rates were 68%, 64%, and 61%. RESULTS: Colorectal cancer patients reported consistently less information seeking than breast and prostate cancer patients. Multivariate analyses revealed that differences by cancer type were not explained by sex or other demographics, disease stage, or treatment received. These differences were most pronounced among patients with early stage cancer. CONCLUSION: Cancer patients have myriad information needs and use a range of sources to satisfy these needs, but there appear to be important differences in information engagement by cancer type. PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS: Understanding differences in information seeking among disease-specific populations may help guide future patient education and decision making across the care continuum.
  PURPOSE: To develop a split-luciferase-based reporter system that allows for noninvasive monitoring of activation of the Her2/neu pathway in vivo in a quantitative and sensitive manner. METHODS AND MATERIALS: Fusion proteins of the ErbB2/Her2/neu receptor to the N-terminal fragment of luciferase and of its downstream binding partner Shc to the C-terminal fragment of luciferase have been engineered owing to the rationale that on activation and binding of the Her2 receptor molecule to Shc, luciferase function will be reconstituted. Thus, the resulting bioluminescence signals can serve as a surrogate measure of receptor activation. RESULTS: We have shown that our reporter systems functions well in vitro in breast cancer cells and in vivo in xenograft tumors. In particular, the activities of Her2/neu in xenograft tumors could be monitored serially for an extended period after radiotherapy. CONCLUSIONS: We believe that the novel ErbB2/Her2/neu reporter we have presented is a powerful tool to study the biology of the Her2-neu pathway in vitro and in vivo. It should also facilitate the development and rapid evaluation of new Her2/neu-targeted therapeutic agents.
  Multi-drug resistance (MDR) represents a major obstacle for chemotherapeutic treatment of a wide variety of human cancers. Increased expression of drug efflux pumps, such as the P-glycoprotein (P-gp) have been linked to development of MDR. Herein, we have identified protein kinase D isoform 2 (PKD2) as an important regulator of MDR and P-gp expression in paclitaxel-treated breast cancer cell lines. PKD2 was expressed with the highest phosphorylated activation status in the MDA-MB-231 cell line. MDA-MB-231 cells were also found to exhibit the highest level of resistance to an array of chemotherapeutic drugs. To further characterize the relationship between PKD2 activation and MDR, we next focused on the effects of the chemotherapeutic agent paclitaxel in MDA-MB-231 cells. Treatment with paclitaxel was shown to induce both PKD2 phosphorylation and P-gp expression in a time-dependent manner. Importantly, shRNA-mediated knockdown of PKD2 in MDA-MB-231 cells resulted in a significant decrease in resistance to paclitaxel, evident as significant decreases in both the IC(50) value and the resistance index (RI). Concurrent with the decrease in drug resistance, paclitaxel-induced expression of P-gp was also significantly reduced in PKD knockdown cells. These results indicate that PKD2 is required for paclitaxel-induced MDR and expression of P-gp. Therefore, modulation of PKD2 activity represents an attractive therapeutic strategy for improvement of the clinical effectiveness of chemotherapy.
  Human estrogen receptor α (ERα) is a nuclear transcription factor that displays a major therapeutic target for breast cancer. The transcriptional activity of ERα can be regulated by particular estrogen receptor modulators. Celastrol, a quinine methide triterpene extracted from a Chinese medicine (Trypterygium wilfordii Hook F.), has been reported to have therapeutic efficacy against various cancer cells, including prostate cancer, leukemia, and melanoma cells. However, ERα regulation by Celastrol has not been reported. In this study, we investigated the effects of Celastrol on the growth of breast cancer cells. We observed that Celastrol decreased expression of ERα at both the mRNA and the protein levels in MCF7 and T47D human breast cancer cells. Results from a luciferase assay showed that Celastrol decreased the transcriptional activity of ERα. Also, Celastrol treatment inhibited ERα target gene expression, including expressions of cyclin D(1), progesterone receptor (PR), and c-Myb leading to cell cycle arrest and growth inhibition of breast cancer cells. We propose that Celastrol, an anti-cancer drug extracted from natural sources, induces inhibition of cell growth through modulation of ERα in estrogen positive breast cancer cells and is a candidate for use in cancer chemotherapy for human breast cancer.
  Several novel 6-[(hetero)arylamino]thieno[3,2-b]pyridines were prepared by palladium-catalyzed C-N Buchwald-Hartwig coupling of the methyl 3-amino-6-bromothieno[3,2-b]pyridine-2-carboxylate with aryl and heteroarylamines, using different reaction conditions. The antitumoral activity of the di(hetero)arylamines obtained was evaluated against three representative human tumor cell lines, namely breast adenocarcinoma (MCF-7), melanoma (A375-C5), and non-small cell lung cancer (NCI-H460) and some structure-activity relationships were established within each series. The most promising compounds were shown to be a benzothiazole derivative with GI(50) 3.5-6.9 μM followed by an indole derivative with GI(50) 13-21 μM.
  PURPOSE: The impact of using the Contura multilumen balloon (MLB) (SenoRx, Inc., Irvine, CA) breast brachytherapy catheter's vacuum port in patients treated with accelerated partial breast irradiation (APBI) was analyzed. METHODS AND MATERIALS: Data from 32 patients at two sites were reviewed. Variables analyzed included the seroma fluid (SF):air volume around the MLB before and after vacuum port use and on its ability to improve (1) the eligibility of patients for APBI and (2) dose coverage of the planning target volume for evaluation (PTV_EVAL) in eligible patients. RESULTS: The median SF/air volume before vacuum removal was 6.8cc vs. 0.8cc after vacuum removal (median reduction in SF/air volume was 90.5%). Before vacuum port use, the median SF/air volume expressed as percentage of the PTV_EVAL was 7.8% (range, 1.9-26.6) in all patients. After application of the vacuum, this was reduced to 1.2%. Before vacuum port use, 10 (31.3%) patients were not considered acceptable candidates for APBI because the SF/air volume:PTV_EVAL ratio (SF:PTV) was greater than 10% (range, 10.1-26.6%; median, 15.2%). After vacuum port use, the median SF:PTV ratio was 1.6% for a median reduction of 91.5%. In addition, the percentage of the prescribed dose covering greater than or equal to 90% of the PTV_EVAL proportionally increased a median of 8% (range, 3-10%) in eligible patients. CONCLUSION: Use of the Contura MLB vacuum port significantly improved the conformity of the target tissue to the balloon surface, leading to reproducible dose delivery and increased target volume coverage. In addition, application of the vacuum allowed the safe treatment of unacceptable patients with APBI.
  PURPOSE: The purpose of the present study was to quantify the robustness of the dose distributions from three whole-breast radiotherapy (RT) techniques involving different levels of intensity modulation against whole patient setup inaccuracies and breast shape changes. METHODS AND MATERIALS: For 19 patients (one computed tomography scan and five cone beam computed tomography scans each), three treatment plans were made (wedge, simple intensity-modulated RT [IMRT], and full IMRT). For each treatment plan, four dose distributions were calculated. The first dose distribution was the original plan. The other three included the effects of patient setup errors (rigid displacement of the bony anatomy) or breast errors (e.g., rotations and shape changes of the breast with respect to the bony anatomy), or both, and were obtained through deformable image registration and dose accumulation. Subsequently, the effects of the plan type and error sources on target volume coverage, mean lung dose, and excess dose were determined. RESULTS: Systematic errors of 1-2 mm and random errors of 2-3 mm (standard deviation) were observed for both patient- and breast-related errors. Planning techniques involving glancing fields (wedge and simple IMRT) were primarily affected by patient errors (∼6% loss of coverage near the dorsal field edge and ∼2% near the skin). In contrast, plan deterioration due to breast errors was primarily observed in planning techniques without glancing fields (full IMRT, ∼2% loss of coverage near the dorsal field edge and ∼4% near the skin). CONCLUSION: The influences of patient and breast errors on the dose distributions are comparable in magnitude for whole breast RT plans, including glancing open fields, rendering simple IMRT the preferred technique. Dose distributions from planning techniques without glancing open fields were more seriously affected by shape changes of the breast, demanding specific attention in partial breast planning techniques.
  The synthesis and study of the structure-activity relationships of a series of rigid analogues of combretastatin A-4 are described which contain the 1,4-diaryl-2-azetidinone (β-lactam) ring system in place of the usual ethylene bridge present in the natural combretastatin stilbene products. The 1,4-diaryl-2-azetidinones are unsubstituted at C-3, or contain methyl substituent(s) at C-3. The most potent compounds 12d and 12e display antiproliferative activity at nanomolar concentrations when evaluated against the MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 human breast carcinoma cell lines. 12d exerts antimitotic effects through an inhibition of tubulin polymerisation and subsequent G(2)/M arrest of the cell cycle in human MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, with similar activity to that of CA-4. These novel β-lactam compounds are identified as potentially useful scaffolds for the further development of antitumour agents which target tubulin.
  Proteomics-based analysis is currently the most promising approach for identifying biomarker proteins for use in drug development. However, many candidate biomarker proteins that are over- or under-expressed in diseased tissues are found by such a procedure. Thus, establishment of an efficient method for screening and validating the more valuable targets is urgently required. Here, we describe the development of an "antibody proteomics system" that facilitates the screening of biomarker proteins from many candidates by rapid preparation of cross-reacting antibodies using phage antibody library technology. Using two-dimensional differential in-gel electrophoresis analysis, 16 over-expressed proteins from breast cancer cells were identified. Specifically, proteins were recovered from the gel pieces and a portion of each sample was used for mass spectrometry analysis. The remainder was immobilized onto a nitrocellulose membrane for antibody-expressing phage enrichment and selection. Using this procedure, antibody-expressing phages against each protein were successfully isolated within two weeks. The expression profiles of the identified proteins were then acquired by immunostaining of breast tumor tissue microarrays with the antibody-expressing phages. Using this approach, expression of Eph receptor A10, TRAIL-R2 and Cytokeratin 8 in breast tumor tissues were successfully validated. These results demonstrate the antibody proteomics system is an efficient method for screening tumor-related biomarker proteins.
  Neuregulin-1 (NRG-1), a cardioactive growth factor released from endothelial cells, is indispensable for cardiac development, structural maintenance, and functional integrity of the heart. In recent years, a growing number of studies have focused on NRG-1 and members of the ErbB family that serve as receptors for NRG-1 in order to better understand the role of this signaling pathway in physiology and pathophysiology of the heart. An essential role for NRG-1 and ErbB in heart development and functionality has been suggested by studies in conditional NRG-1/ErbB-deficient mice and by the cardiac-related side effects of anti-ErbB2 antibody therapies used for treatment of breast cancer. In vitro and in vivo studies using recombinant human neuregulin-1 (rhNRG-1), which contains the epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like domain (necessary for ErbB2/ErbB4 activation), have further supported the hypothesis that NRG-1 plays an important role in heart function. Consistent with other studies, expression of rhNRG-1 not only restored normal cardiomyocytic structure altered by nutritional deficiency in cell cultures, but also improved the pumping function of the heart in several animal models of chronic heart failure (CHF). As a result of these findings, proteins involved in the NRG-1/ErbB-signaling pathway have been explored as potential drug targets for treatment of heart failure. Clinical trials to evaluate the safety and efficacy of rhNRG-1 have been conducted in both China and Australia. As predicted, rhNRG-1 treatment improved both cardiac function and reversed remodeling of the heart. Therefore, rhNRG-1 may represent a new drug for treatment of CHF with a novel therapeutic mechanism.
  Regulatory regions of the human genome can be modified through epigenetic processes during prenatal life to make an individual more likely to suffer chronic diseases when they reach adulthood. The modification of chromatin and DNA contributes to a larger well-documented process known as "programming" whereby stressors in the womb give rise to adult onset diseases, including cancer. It is now well known that death from ischemic heart disease is related to birth weight; the lower the birth weight, the higher the risk of death from cardiovascular disease as well as type 2 diabetes and osteoporosis. Recent epidemiological data link rapid growth in the womb to metabolic disease and obesity and also to breast and lung cancers. There is increasing evidence that "marked" regions of DNA can become "unmarked" under the influence of dietary nutrients. This gives hope for reversing propensities for cancers and other diseases that were acquired in the womb. For several cancers, the size and shape of the placenta are associated with a person's cardiovascular and cancer risks as are maternal body mass index and height. The features of placental growth and nutrient transport properties that lead to adult disease have been little studied. In conclusion, several cancers have their origins in the womb, including lung and breast cancer. More research is needed to determine the epigenetic processes that underlie the programming of these diseases.
  PURPOSE: To provide guidance for clinicians about the diagnosis, staging and treatment of breast cancer occurring during an otherwise uncomplicated pregnancy. METHODS: An international expert Panel convened to address a series of questions identified by a literature review and personal experience. Issues relating to the diagnosis and management of breast cancer after delivery were outside the scope. RESULTS: There is a paucity of large and/or randomized studies. Based on cohort studies, case series and case reports, the recommendations represent the best available evidence, albeit of a lower grade than is optimal. RECOMMENDATIONS: In most circumstances, serious consideration should be given to the option of treating breast cancer whilst continuing with the pregnancy. Each woman should ideally be referred to a centre with sufficient expertise, given a clear explanation of treatment options. Most diagnostic and staging examinations can be performed adequately and safely during pregnancy. Treatment should however be adapted to the clinical presentation and the trimester of the pregnancy: surgery can be performed during all trimesters of pregnancy; radiotherapy can be considered during the first and second trimester but should be postponed during the third trimester; and standard chemotherapies can be used during the second and third trimester. Since neonatal morbidity mainly appears to be related to prematurity, delivery should not be induced before 37weeks, if at all possible. CONCLUSIONS: The treatment of breast cancer in pregnancy should be executed by experienced specialists in a multidisciplinary setting and should adhere as closely as possible to standard protocols.
  PURPOSE: To assess the use of trastuzumab concurrently with whole brain radiotherapy (WBRT) for patients with brain metastases from human epidermal growth factor receptor-2-positive breast cancer. METHODS AND MATERIALS: Between April 2001 and April 2007, 31 patients with brain metastases from human epidermal growth factor receptor-2-positive breast cancer were referred for WBRT with concurrent trastuzumab. At brain progression, the median age was 55 years (range, 38-73), and all patients had a performance status of 0-2. The patients received trastuzumab 2 mg/kg weekly (n = 17) or 6 mg/kg repeated every 21 days (n = 14). In 26 patients, concurrent WBRT delivered 30 Gy in 10 daily fractions. In 6 patients, other fractionations were chosen because of either poor performance status or patient convenience. RESULTS: After WBRT, radiologic responses were observed in 23 patients (74.2%), including 6 (19.4%) with a complete radiologic response and 17 (54.8%) with a partial radiologic response. Clinical responses were observed in 27 patients (87.1%). The median survival time from the start of WBRT was 18 months (range, 2-65). The median interval to brain progression was 10.5 months (range, 2-27). No Grade 2 or greater acute toxicity was observed. CONCLUSION: The low toxicity of trastuzumab concurrently with WBRT should probably not justify delays. Although promising, these preliminary data warrant additional validation of trastuzumab as a potential radiosensitizer for WBRT in brain metastases from breast cancer in the setting of a clinical trial.
  PURPOSE: To document clinical training and resident working conditions reported by chief residents during their residency. METHODS AND MATERIALS: During the academic years 2005 to 2006, 2006 to 2007, and 2007 to 2008, the Association of Residents in Radiation Oncology conducted a nationwide survey of all radiation oncology chief residents in the United States. Chi-square statistics were used to assess changes in clinical training and resident working conditions over time. RESULTS: Surveys were completed by representatives from 55 programs (response rate, 71.4%) in 2005 to 2006, 60 programs (75.9%) in 2006 to 2007, and 74 programs (93.7%) in 2007 to 2008. Nearly all chief residents reported receiving adequate clinical experience in commonly treated disease sites, such as breast and genitourinary malignancies; and commonly performed procedures, such as three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy and intensity-modulated radiotherapy. Clinical experience in extracranial stereotactic radiotherapy increased over time (p < 0.001), whereas clinical experience in endovascular brachytherapy (p <0.001) decreased over time. The distribution of gynecologic and prostate brachytherapy cases remained stable, while clinical case load in breast brachytherapy increased (p = 0.006). A small but significant percentage of residents reported receiving inadequate clinical experience in pediatrics, seeing 10 or fewer pediatric cases during the course of residency. Procedures involving higher capital costs, such as particle beam therapy and intraoperative radiotherapy, and infrequent clinical use, such as head and neck brachytherapy, were limited to a minority of institutions. Most residency programs associated with at least one satellite facility have incorporated resident rotations into their clinical training, and the majority of residents at these programs find them valuable experiences. The majority of residents reported working 60 or fewer hours per week on required clinical duties. CONCLUSIONS: Trends in clinical training and resident working conditions over 3 years are documented to allow residents and program directors to assess their residency training.
  PURPOSE: Several accelerated partial breast irradiation (APBI) techniques are described in the literature, and apparently, the three-dimensional (3D)-conformal technique is being used increasingly. Nonetheless, the optimal radiation dose is not yet known. Here, we report feasibility and early toxicities of APBI delivering 40 Gy over 5 days, in a phase II trial. METHODS AND MATERIALS: From October 2007 to September 2008, 25 patients with pT1N0 cancer received 3D-conformal APBI. The prescribed radiation dose was 40 Gy in 4-Gy fractions given twice daily. This technique used two minitangents and an "en face" electron field. Toxicities were systematically assessed at 1, 2, and 6 months and then once every 6 months. RESULTS: The planning tumor volume for evaluation (PTV_EVAL) coverage was adequate: the mean dose to the PTV_EVAL was 41.8 Gy (range, 41-42.4 Gy). Mean doses to the ipsilateral lung and heart were 1.6 Gy (range, 1.0-2.3 Gy) and 1.2 Gy (range, 1.0-1.6 Gy), respectively. One and two months after completion of APBI, most patients had no or mild erythema (n = 16 patients at 1 month; n = 25 patients at 2 months); none of these patients developed moist desquamation. After a median follow-up of 12 months, only 1 patient had a significant moderate field contracture (grade 2). Other reported late toxicities were grade 1. CONCLUSIONS: 3D-conformal APBI (with two minitangents and an "en face" electron field) using a total dose of 40 Gy in 10 fractions twice daily over 5 days achieved appropriate PTV_EVAL coverage and offered significant sparing of normal tissue. Early tolerance was excellent.
  PURPOSE: To objectively evaluate the radiation dermatitis caused by accelerated partial breast irradiation (APBI) using high-dose-rate interstitial brachytherapy. PATIENTS AND METHODS: The skin color and moisture changes were examined using a newly installed spectrophotometer and corneometer in 22 patients who had undergone APBI using open cavity implant high-dose-rate interstitial brachytherapy (36 Gy in six fractions) and compared with the corresponding values for 44 patients in an external beam radiotherapy (EBRT) control group (50-60 Gy in 25-30 fractions within 5-6 weeks) after breast conserving surgery. RESULTS: All values changed significantly as a result of APBI. The extent of elevation in a∗ (reddish) and reduction in L∗ (black) values caused by APBI were similar to those for EBRT, with slightly delayed recovery for 6-12 months after treatment owing to the surgical procedure. In contrast, only APBI caused a change in the b∗ values, and EBRT did not, demonstrating that the reduction in b∗ values (yellowish) depends largely on the surgical procedure. The changes in moisture were less severe after APBI than after EBRT, and the recovery was more rapid. The toxicity assessment using the Common Toxicity Criteria, version 3, showed that all dermatitis caused by APBI was Grade 2 or less. CONCLUSION: An objective analysis can quantify the effects of APBI procedures on color and moisture cosmesis. The radiation dermatitis caused by APBI using the present schedule showed an equivalent effect on skin color and a less severe effect on moisture than the effects caused by standard EBRT.
  BACKGROUND: New Zealand Maori have a poorer outcome from breast cancer than non-Maori, yet prognostic data are sparse. The objective of this study was to quantify levels of prognostic factors in a cohort of self-declared Maori and European breast cancer patients from Christchurch, New Zealand. Methods and Results Clinicopathological and survival data from 337 consecutive breast cancer patients (27 Maori, 310 European) were evaluated. Fewer tumours were high grade in Maori women than European women (p=0.027). No significant ethnic differences were detected for node status, tumour type, tumour size, human epidermal growth factor receptor, oestrogen and progesterone receptor (ER/PR) status, or survival. In addition, tumour and serum samples from a sub-cohort of 14 Maori matched to 14 NZ European patients were analyzed by immunohistochemistry and enzyme linked immunosorbent assay for molecular prognostic factors. Significant correlations were detected between increased grade and increased levels of hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1alpha), glucose transporter-1 (GLUT-1), microvessel density (MVD) and cytokeratins CK5/6 (p<0.05). High nodal status correlated with reduced carbonic anhydrase IX (CA-IX). Negative ER/PR status correlated with increased GLUT-1, CA-IX and MVD. Within the molecular factors, increased HIF-1alpha correlated with raised GLUT-1, MVD and CK5/6, and CK5/6 with GLUT-1 and MVD (p<0.05). The small number of patients in this sub-cohort limited discrimination of ethnic differences. CONCLUSIONS: In this Christchurch cohort of breast cancer patients, Maori women were no more likely than European women to have pathological or molecular factors predictive of poor prognosis. These data contrast with data from the North Island NZ, and suggest potential regional differences.
  BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play an important role in the regulation of cell growth, differentiation, apoptosis, and carcinogenesis. Detection of their expression may lead to identifying novel markers for breast cancer. METHODS: We profiled miRNA expression in three breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7, MDA-MB-231, and MDA-MB-468) and then focused on one miRNA, miR-339-5p, for its role in regulation of tumor cell growth, migration, and invasion and target gene expression. We then analyzed miR-339-5p expression in benign and cancerous breast tissue specimens. RESULTS: A number of miRNAs were differentially expressed in these cancer cell lines. Real-time PCR indicated that miR-339-5p expression was downregulated in the aggressive cell lines MDA-MB-468 and MDA-MB-231 and in breast cancer tissues compared with benign tissues. Transfection of miR-339-5p oligonucleotides reduced cancer cell growth only slightly but significantly decreased tumor cell migration and invasion capacity compared with controls. Real-time PCR analysis showed that BCL-6, a potential target gene of miR-339-5p, was downregulated in MDA-MB-231 cells by miR-339-5p transfection. Furthermore, the reduced miR-339-5p expression was associated with an increase in metastasis to lymph nodes and with high clinical stages. Kaplan-Meier analyses found that the patients with miR-339-5p expression had better overall and relapse-free survivals compared with those without miR-339-5p expression. Cox proportional hazards analyses showed that miR-339-5p expression was an independent prognostic factor for breast cancer patients. CONCLUSIONS: MiR-339-5p may play an important role in breast cancer progression, suggesting that miR-339-5p should be further evaluated as a biomarker for predicting the survival of breast cancer patients.
  BACKGROUND: LATS2, which encodes a novel serine/threonine kinase, is known to be important in centrosome duplication and in the maintenance of genomic stability. Recently, a potential role for LATS2 in cancer has been reported. In breast cancer and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), LATS2 mRNA is downregulated and has been suggested to be a tumor suppressor. However, the role of LATS2 in nasopharyngeal carcinoma has not been investigated. In this study, we aimed to investigate the expression pattern of LATS2 and its clinicopathological involvement in nasopharyngeal carcinoma to understand its effect on cell survival. METHODS: Using quantitative real time PCR and immunoblotting, the expression of LATS2 was detected in nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell lines and in the immortalized nasopharyngeal epithelial cell line NP69. Using immunohistochemistry, we analyzed LATS2 protein expression in 220 nasopharyngeal carcinoma cases. The association of LATS2 protein expression with the clinicopathological characteristics and the prognosis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma were subsequently assessed. Using methylation specific PCR, we detected the methylation status of the LATS2 promoter. RNA interference was performed by transfecting siRNA to specifically knock down LATS2 expression in 5-8F and CNE2. RESULTS: LATS2 protein was detected in 178 of 220 (80.91%) cases of nasopharyngeal carcinoma. LATS2 overexpression was a significant, independent prognosis predictor (P = 0.037) in nasopharyngeal carcinoma patients. Methylation specific PCR revealed that 36.7% (11/30) of nasopharyngeal carcinoma tissues and all of the chronic nasopharyngeal inflammation samples were methylated. Functional studies showed that the suppression of LATS2 expression in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (5-8F and CNE2) cell lines by using specific small interfering (siRNA) resulted in the inhibition of growth, induction of apoptosis and S-phase cell cycle increase. Overexpression of LATS2 in NP69 stimulated cell proliferation. CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that LATS2 might play a role in the tumorigenesis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma by promoting the growth of nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells. Transfection with specific siRNA might be feasible for the inhibition of growth, induction of apoptosis and S phase increase in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
  Transient receptor potential melastatin 8 (TRPM8) is a non-selective cation channel activated by cold temperature and cooling agents. TRPM8 is expressed in a subpopulation of cold-sensitive sensory neurons, as well as in the male urogenital system. TRPM8 is markedly upregulated in prostate cancer and in other tumors such as breast adenocarcinoma and melanoma. Moreover, recent studies suggest the potential involvement of TRPM8 channels in the pathophysiology of cold nociception and cold allodynia. This has led to a strong interest in the pursuit of novel modulators of TRPM8 channels. This review highlights our current knowledge of TRPM8 pharmacology and modulation mechanisms, detailing structural features important for TRPM8 gating by different agonists, the mechanism of antagonism by different compounds and the potential relevance of TRPM8 for treatment of various pathological conditions.
  This article reviews laboratory and epidemiological research into the endocrine disruptive effects of components of personal care products, namely, phthalate esters, parabens, ultraviolet (UV) filters, polycyclic musks, and antimicrobials. High doses of phthalates in utero can produce &#x201C;phthalate syndrome,&#x201D; demasculinizing effects in male rat offspring due to impaired testosterone production by fetal testes. However, evidence linking phthalate exposure to similar effects in humans appears inconclusive. Furthermore, phthalate exposure derived from personal care products is within safe limits and its principal bioavailable phthalate, diethyl phthalate (DEP), does not produce &#x201C;phthalate syndrome.&#x201D; Parabens exhibit very weak estrogen activity in vitro and in vivo, but evidence of paraben-induced developmental and reproductive toxicity in vivo lacks consistency and physiological coherence. Evidence attempting to link paraben exposure with human breast cancer is nonexistent. Select UV filters at high doses produce estrogenic, antithyroid, and other effects in rats in vivo. Again, no evidence links UV filter exposure to endocrine disruptive effects in humans. Some polycyclic musks weakly bind to estrogen, androgen, or progestin receptors and exhibit primarily antagonistic activity in vitro, which for the most part, has yet to be confirmed in vivo in mammals. The antimicrobials triclocarban and triclosan evoke weak responses mediated by aryl hydrocarbon, estrogen, and androgen receptors in vitro, which require confirmation in vivo. Preliminary observations suggest a novel interaction between triclocarban and testosterone. In conclusion, although select constituents exhibit interactions with the endocrine system in the laboratory, the evidence linking personal care products to endocrine disruptive effects in humans is for the most part lacking.
  ABSTRACT Until recently, the best protection against breast cancer mortality was early diagnosis through mammographic screening. However, the possibility that breast cancer in some cases can be prevented has come to light over the past 30 years. Various risk reduction strategies of breast cancer have been explored including lifestyle modification, prophylactic surgeries, and the use of chemopreventive agents. This article is the second portion of a two-part series on breast cancer prevention, and will focus its discussion on the available risk reduction interventions that have been shown to prevent breast cancer in women considered high risk for the disease. &#x00A0;&#x00A0;&#x00A0;&#x00A0;&#x00A0;&#x00A0;(See Part I in Cancer Investigation, 28:743&#xFFFD;750, 2010).
  Mammary tumors are a major health threat to women and female dogs. In both metastasis of the primary tumor to distant organs is the most common cause of tumor-related death. Nevertheless, the molecular mechanisms of tumor metastasis are far from being understood and it is still unknown why some human and canine carcinomas metastasize and others do not. Using 2D-DIGE and MALDI-TOF-MS we identified 21 proteins with significant changes (fold change > 1.5; p < 0.05) in protein expression between metastasizing (n=6) and non-metastasizing (n=6) canine mammary carcinomas. Quantitative RT-PCR was used to identify transcriptional or post-transcriptional regulation of protein expression. Up-regulated proteins in metastatic carcinomas included PCNA, FTL, BOMAPIN, TPM3, TXNDC5, ADA, OAT, CORO1A, RANBP1, PGDH and EEF1D. Down-regulated proteins in metastatic carcinomas included CALB2, MYL2, PRDX6, MASPIN, FGB, VCL, IDH1, TPM1, ANXA5, and ARHGAP1. Interestingly, 19 of these 21 proteins have been described with a malignancy-associated expression in human breast cancer and other human cancer types before. Further investigations are now necessary to test whether these markers are of prognostic value for canine mammary carcinomas and whether their expression is directly involved in canine mammary carcinogenesis or represent solely a secondary reactive phenotype.
  Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles are widely used as nanoprobes for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Water-soluble iron oxide nanoparticles were synthesized by coating iron oxide nanoparticles with a hydrophilic, biocompatible, biodegradable poly(amino acid) derivative, poly(2-hydroxyethyl aspartamide) graft copolymer for negative contrast enhancement on T(2) weighted MRI. HER2/neu antibodies were conjugated on the surface of poly(amino acid) coated iron oxide nanoparticles for the detection of breast cancer. The antibody-grafted iron oxide nanoparticles (PAION-Ab) were about 31.1 nm in diameter. The T(2) relaxivity of PAION-Ab was 246 L·mmol(-1)·sec(-1) greater than that of the commercial product such as Feridex. PAION-Ab showed low cytotoxicity even at relatively high concentrations. Furthermore, Prussian blue staining and in vitro MRI study with SKBR-3, breast cancer cells overexpressing HER2/neu receptors indicated that PAION-Ab exhibited excellent cancer cell detection ability and enhanced signal intensities in the T(2)-weighted image.
  This study is to investigate the binding capability of lidamycin apoprotein (LDP), an enediyne-associated apoprotein of the chromoprotein antitumor antibiotic family, to human breast cancer and normal tissues, the correlation of LDP binding capability to human breast cancer tissues and the expression of tumor therapeutic targets such as VEGF and HER2. In this study, the binding capability of LDP to human breast cancer tissues was detected with tissue microarray. The correlation study of LDP binding capability to human breast tumor tissues and relevant therapeutic targets was performed on breast cancer tissue microarrays. Immunocytochemical examination was used to detect the binding capability of LDP to human breast carcinoma MCF-7 cells. As a result, tissue microarray showed that LDP staining of 73.2% (30/41) of breast cancer tissues was positive, whereas that of 48.3% (15/31) of the adjacent normal breast specimens was positive. The difference between the tumor and normal samples was significant (Chi2 = 4.63, P < 0.05). LDP immunoreactivity in breast cancer correlated significantly with the overexpression of VEGF and HER2 (P < 0.001 and < 0.01, r = 0.389 and 0.287, respectively). Determined with confocal immunofluorescent analysis, LDP showed the binding capability to mammary carcinoma MCF-7 cells. It is demonstrated that LDP can bind to human breast cancer tissues and there is significant difference between the breast cancer tissues and the corresponding normal tissues. Notably, the binding reactivity shows positive correlation with the expression of VEGF and HER2 in breast carcinoma tissues. The results imply that LDP may have a potential use as targeting drug carrier in the research and development of new anticancer therapeutics. This study may provide reference for drug combination of LDM and other therapeutic agents.

  OBJECTIVE: To introduce the College of American Pathologists/American College of Medical Genetics Cytogenetics Resource Committee criteria for genetic heterogeneity (GH) in HER2 testing, and investigate the clinicopathological significance of HER2 genetic heterogeneity in invasive breast cancer. METHODS: The clinical parameters of 100 cases of invasive breast carcinomas were collected. HER2 expression level and HER2 gene copy number in formalin-fixed and paraffin embedded tumor samples were detected by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), and the relationship between HER2 gene GH and clinicopathological characteristics were analyzed. RESULTS: Among the 100 patients, HER2 gene GH was observed in 20 (20%) cases. When the number of HER2 amplified cells was more than 25%, the frequencies of FISH positive were higher than those cases with less than 25% HER2 amplified cells. The results showed that HER2 gene GH was associated with the degree of HER2 protein expression (P=0.004), and ER expression (P=0.002). CONCLUSION: HER2 gene GH may be correlated with the HER2 protein IHC 1+/2+, and ER expression in breast carcinoma. It is important for doctors to avoid ignoring or only counting FISH positive cells leading to incorrect diagnosis for these patients.
  BACKGROUND: Beast cancer is the commonest malignancy afflicting women. It accounts for 18.4% of all female cancers worldwide. OBJECTIVE: To determine the diagnostic accuracy of fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) of palpable breast masses at a Nigerian University Teaching Hospital.. METHODS: Fine Needle Aspiration Cytology was done on all consecutive cases of palpable breast masses referred from the surgical outpatient clinic of the University of Benin Teaching Hospital between January 2005 and March 2006. Comparison was made with subsequent histological diagnoses in order to ascertain the diagnostic accuracy of the procedure. RESULTS: One hundred and three fine needle aspirates of breast masses were performed during the study period. Subsequent biopsies were done on 43 of these cases yielding a biopsy rate of 41.8%. The absolute and complete sensitivities of this study were 84.6% and 97.4% respectively. The full specificity was 64% while the specificity for biopsy cases was 75%. The positive predictive value for malignancies was 100% with a false positive rate of 0%; however the false negative rate was 2.6% with a suspicious rate of 9.7%. The inadequacy rate was 19.4%. CONCLUSION: These results show that FNAC of palpable breast masses in UBTH is an accurate procedure with results comparable to those from other centres and well above the minimum standards recommended internationally. It is, therefore, recommended that FNAC be done on all palpable breast masses.
  BACKGROUND: Lower mammography screening rates among minority and low income women contribute to increased morbidity and mortality from breast cancer. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of a patient navigation intervention on adherence rates to biennial screening mammography among women engaged in primary care at an inner-city academic medical center. DESIGN: Quality improvement intervention with a concurrent control group, conducted from February to November of 2008. STUDY SUBJECTS: All women in a hospital-based primary care practice aged 51-70 years. Subjects were randomized at the level of their primary care provider, such that half of the patients in the practice received the intervention, while the other half received usual care. INTERVENTIONS: Intervention subjects whose last mammogram was >18 months prior received a combination of telephone calls and reminder letters from patient navigators trained to identify barriers to care. Navigators were integrated into primary care teams and interacted directly with patients, providers, and radiology to coordinate care. Navigators utilized an electronic report to track subjects. Adherence rates to biennial mammography were assessed in intervention and control groups at baseline and post-intervention. KEY RESULTS: A total of 3,895 women were randomized to intervention (n = 1,817) and control (n = 2,078) groups. Mean age was 60, 71% were racial/ethnic minorities, 23% were non-English speaking, and 63% had public or no health insurance. At baseline, there was no difference in mammography adherence between the control and intervention groups (78%, respectively, p = 0.55). After the 9-month intervention, mammogram adherence was higher in the intervention group compared with the control group (87% vs. 76%, respectively, p < 0.001). Except among Hispanic women who demonstrated high rates in both the intervention and control groups (85% and 83%, respectively), all racial/ethnic and insurance groups demonstrated higher adherence in the intervention group. CONCLUSIONS: Patient navigation improves biennial mammography rates for inner city, low income, minority populations.
  Polymyositis (PM) is a very rare paraneoplastic syndrome in association with breast cancer, here we present a breast cancer patient with a sudden onset of respiratory failure caused by PM. A 47-year-old woman, with a history of a lump in her right breast for 3 months, weakness and anorexia for about 1 month, suddenly presented with respiratory failure and elevated muscle enzymes. Muscle biopsy revealed myositis and breast biopsy was consistent with invasive ductal breast cancer. Decreases of muscle enzyme levels were observed after corticosteroid therapy and the lumpectomy, but the patient died from respiratory failure. A case of respiratory failure caused by breast cancer associated polymyositis was presented. This case server to remind that breast cancer patients with muscle weakness or muscle enzyme elevation may be involved with PM.
  BACKGROUND: We reported a novel technique of sentinel lymph node (SLN) identification using fluorescence imaging of indocyanine green injection. Furthermore, to obtain safe and accurate identification of SLN during surgery, we introduce the image overlay navigation surgery and evaluate its efficacy. METHODS: This study enrolled 50 patients with a tumors <2 cm in diameter. Initially, we obtained three-dimensional (3-D) imaging from multidetector-row computed tomography (MD-CT) by volume rendering. It was projected on the patient's operative field with the clear visualization of lymph node (LN) through projector. Then, the dye of indocyanine green (ICG) was injected subdermally in the areola. Subcutaneous lymphatic channels draining from the areola to the axilla were visible by fluorescence imaging immediately. Lymphatic flow was reached after LN revealed on 3-D imaging. After incising the axillary skin on the point of LN mapping, SLN was then dissected under the guidance of fluorescence imaging with adequate adjustment of sensitivity and 3-D imaging. RESULTS: Lymphatic channels and SLN were successfully identified by Photodynamic eye (PDE) in all patients. And the sites of skin incision also were identical with the LN being demonstrated by 3-D imaging in all patients. The mean number of SLN was 3.7. The image overlay navigation surgery was visually easy to identify the location of SLN from the axillary skin. There were no intra- or postoperative complications associated with SLN identification. CONCLUSIONS: This combined navigations of fluorescence and 3-D imaging revealed more easy and effective to detect SLN intraoperatively than fluorescence imaging alone.
  Neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACT) in breast cancer has undergone continuous evolution over the last few decades to establish its role in the combined modality management of these tumors. The process of evolution is still far from over. Many questions are still lurking in the minds of oncologists treating breast cancer. This review analyzes the evidence from metaanlyses, major multiinstitutional prospective trials, retrospective institutional series and systematic reviews in breast cancer to determine the current standards and controversies in NACT. The most effective drugs, their advantages, issues and controversies in delivery as well as the criteria for response are reviewed. A summary of evidence-based consensus is presented and unresolved aspects are discussed.
  A new technical approach to breast-tumor detection is proposed. The technique is based on fluorescence x-ray analysis, and can identify a miniature malignant tumor within the breast. The primary beam intensity needed in fluorescence x-ray analysis is on a lower order of magnitude than that used in mammography. Thus, the newly-proposed technique would enable detection of a still tiny breast cancer while dramatically lowering the radiation dose. Field-emission x-ray sources might be a key for translating this concept into a medical technique.
  INTRODUCTION: It is widely believed that discovery of specific, sensitive, and reliable tumor biomarkers can improve the treatment of cancer. Currently, there are no obvious targets that can be used in treating triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). METHODS: To better understand TNBC and find potential biomarkers for targeted treatment, we combined a novel hydrophobic fractionation protocol with mass spectrometry LTQ-orbitrap to explore and compare the hydrophobic sub-proteome of TNBC with another subtype of breast cancer, hormone-receptor-positive-Her2-negative breast cancer (non-TNBC). RESULTS: Hydrophobic sub-proteome of breast cancer is rich in membrane proteins. Hundreds of proteins with various defined key cellular functions were identified from TNBC and non-TNBC tumors. In this study, protein profiles of TNBC and non-TNBC were systematically examined, compared, and validated. We have found that nine keratins are down-regulated and several heat shock proteins are up-regulated in TNBC tissues. Our study may provide insights of molecules that are responsible for the aggressiveness of TNBC. CONCLUSION: The initial results obtained using a combination of hydrophobic fractionation and nano-LC mass spectrometry analysis of these proteins appear promising in the discovery of potential cancer biomarkers and bio-signatures. When sufficiently refined, this approach may prove useful in improving breast cancer treatment.
  A 43-year-old woman had a pulmonary tumor detected by a computed tomographic (CT) scan during follow-up for breast cancer 15 years previously. The tumor showed a solid mass measuring 42 × 32 × 12 mm in extensive contact with the pleura of the apex of the left upper lobe. The edge of the tumor was relatively well-defined with an irregular shape, and a bubblelike area was seen within it. The longitudinal slice high-resolution CT findings showed a flat and thick mass, and its inferior border was distinct and horizontal. The pathological findings by a thoracoscopic lung biopsy showed a localized pulmonary fibrosis of the apex, a so-called pulmonary apical cap (PAC). With the recent advances in CT scan technology, the detection of PACs is very likely to increase, and they must be differentiated from superior sulcus tumors.
  Breast cancer accounts for approximately one quarter of all cancers in females. HER2 gene amplification or HER2 protein overexpression, detected in about 20% of breast carcinomas, predicts a more aggressive clinical course and determines eligibility for targeted therapy with trastuzumab. HER2 testing has become an essential part of the clinical evaluation of all breast carcinoma patients, and accurate HER2 results are critical in identifying patients who may be benefited from targeted therapy. This study investigated the concordance in the results of HER2 immunohistochemistry assays performed in 500 invasive breast carcinomas between a reference laboratory and 149 local laboratories from all geographic regions of Brazil. Our results showed an overall poor concordance (171 of 500 cases, 34.2%) regarding HER2 results between local and reference laboratories, which may be related to the low-volume load of HER2 assays, inexperience with HER2 scoring system, and/or technical issues related to immunohistochemistry in local laboratories. Standardization of HER2 testing with rigorous quality control measures by local laboratories is highly recommended to avoid erroneous treatment of breast cancer patients.
  Neutral-buffered formalin is the most commonly used tissue fixative in pathology laboratory. Among other fixatives, Bouin's solution has been used in several laboratories and is still in use for particular tissues. In this project, we determine if we can study breast clinical markers on archived Bouin-fixed tissue samples with immunohistochemistry (IHC) protocols optimized for tissue fixed in neutral-buffered formalin. To evaluate the concordance of IHC results between formalin-fixed and Bouin-fixed tissues, we calculated the concordance percentage and the κ statistic of 12 clinical IHC markers quantified by an automated system on breast cancer tissues fixed in neutral-buffered formalin and their corresponding tissues fixed in Bouin's solution. When positivity threshold of immunostaining was setup at ≥10% for both fixation conditions, we observed a concordance percentage of 83.9% (κ=0.65). However, when positivity threshold of immunostaining was lowered to 3% to 4% for Bouin-fixed tissues, concordance percentage was then of 96.8% (κ=0.92). Our data demonstrate that we can study IHC markers on archived Bouin-fixed tissue from patients with long clinical follow-up using IHC protocols optimized for formalin-fixed tissues after an adjustment of the positivity threshold of immunostaining quantified by an automated system.
  Phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN) is a negative regulator of the phosphoinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT signaling pathway that controls cell cycle progression, growth and inhibition of apoptosis. Loss of PTEN protein expression has been associated with tumorigenesis, cancer progression and drug resistance, but conflicting results exist which may be due in part to difficulties inherent in PTEN immunohistochemistry (IHC). We sought a robust PTEN IHC assay. Human tumor cell lines with PTEN status verified by copy number analysis were formalin fixed and paraffin embedded for use as positive and negative controls. PTEN antibodies were optimized on tumor cell lines. Five optimized antibodies were analyzed on 10 molecularly characterized endometrial carcinoma samples. Four antibodies (CST, Millipore, Abcam, Novus) stained 3/10 positive and 7/10 negative, however, all but CST exhibited nonspecific nucleolar staining of negative controls. One antibody (Dako) stained 5/10 positive and 5/10 negative but with areas (≤10%) of positivity. The 4 samples predicted to be negative by sequencing were negative with the CST antibody, however, one was positive with Dako; as a result we chose the CST antibody for our assay. The assay was validated on an automated platform using 50 formalin fixed and paraffin embedded colon, lung, prostate and breast adenocarcinoma cases. Tumor cell lines served as external controls; endothelial cells and peripheral nerves served as internal positive controls. Dichotomous scoring achieved 100% concordance between three independent pathologists. This reproducible PTEN assay (PREZEON&!trade;) has been implemented in a CLIA certified laboratory.
  BACKGROUND: In breast cancer, vascular endothelial growth factor C, transforming growth factor β, placental growth factor, and fibroblast growth factor (acidic and basic) promote angiogenesis and metastases. We tested the hypothesis that a propofol-paravertebral anesthetic (PPA) technique would attenuate postoperative changes in these angiogenic factors to a greater extent than balanced general anesthesia (GA) and morphine analgesia in women undergoing surgery for primary breast cancer. METHOD:: Forty women with primary breast cancer undergoing surgical excision were randomized to receive either standard GA or PPA technique. Venous blood was sampled before and at 24 h after surgery and serum analyzed. The primary endpoint was a preoperative versus postoperative change in vascular endothelial growth factor C and transforming growth factor β concentrations. RESULTS:: Using a visual analog scale (median [25-75% interquartile range]), PPA patients (1 [0-2]) had less pain at 2 h (P = 0.02) than did GA patients (3 [2-5]). The mean postoperative change in vascular endothelial growth factor C concentrations among GA patients was 733 versus 27 pg/ml for PPA patients (difference, 706 [97.5% CI, 280-1,130] pg/ml, P = 0.001). In contrast, the mean postoperative change in transforming growth factor β concentration among GA patients was -163 versus 146 pg/ml for PPA patients (difference, 309 [97.5% CI, -474 to -143] pg/ml, P = 0.005). Concentrations of placental growth factor and fibroblast growth factor, both acidic and basic, were undetectable in serum. CONCLUSION:: Anesthetic technique influences serum concentrations of factors associated with angiogenesis in primary breast cancer surgery.
  Due to the small volume and high density of breast tissue in Asian women, particularly younger women, mammographic diagnosis is sometimes non-conclusive, with a Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS) result of 0. No alternative based on blood biomarkers has yet succeeded in discriminating between patients with breast cancer (BC) and those with benign breast disease (BBD) among BI-RADS 0 patients. In our study, 84 BC and 94 BBD patients with mammographic results and confirmed pathologic information were enrolled and categorized into two groups, namely, 79 BC and 73 BBD patients with BI-RADS 1-5 and 5 BC and 21 BBD patients with BI-RADS 0. RNA extracted from peripheral blood samples collected in PAXgene(™) tubes was analyzed after NuGEN WT-Ovation(™) RNA amplification using Affymetrix GeneChip(®) HG-U133 Plus 2.0 arrays to explore the gene expression repertoire in peripheral blood samples. A 28-gene panel was selected that was capable of correctly discriminating BC from BBD patients. Using this 28-gene panel, we correctly classified 88% of the samples using BI-RADS 1-5 as the training set and correctly predicted 73% of the samples in testing for BI-RADS 0. This study shows that a peripheral blood mRNA signature can help discriminate breast cancer from benign breast diseases, particularly in patients with non-conclusive mammography.
  Lower levels of global DNA methylation in white blood cell (WBC) DNA have been associated with adult cancers. It is unknown whether individuals with a family history of cancer also have lower levels of global DNA methylation early in life. We examined global DNA methylation in WBC (measured in three repetitive elements, LINE1, Sat2 and Alu, by MethyLight and in LINE1 by pyrosequencing) in 51 girls aged 6-17 years. Compared to girls without a family history of breast cancer, methylation levels were lower for all assays in girls with a family history of breast cancer and statistically significantly lower for Alu and LINE1 pyrosequencing. After adjusting for age, body mass index (BMI) and Tanner stage, only methylation in Alu was associated with family history of breast cancer. If these findings are replicated in larger studies, they suggest that lower levels of global WBC DNA methylation observed later in life in adults with cancer may also be present early in life in children with a family history of cancer.
  Adaptive responses within hypoxic tumor microenvironments require the altered expression of Solute Carrier (SLC) transporters to maintain nutrient uptake in support of cellular metabolism and biosynthesis. Using a real time PCR array strategy to further characterize changes in transporter expression within a chronic hypoxia breast cancer cell line model (BT474), we have found a 31 fold increase in the expression of the thiamine transporter, SLC19A3. Thus, further investigations into the expression changes of the thiamine transporters, SLC19A2 and SLC19A3, and the role of hypoxia inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1α) regulating their expression were conducted. Chronic culturing of BT474 cells in 1% O(2) up to 142 days consistently demonstrated a high level of SLC19A3 expression with a mean of approximately 40 fold with no change in SLC19A2. A corresponding 2 fold increase in thiamine uptake over 15 min was measured in chronic hypoxic BT474 cells compared to normoxia. Acute 1% O(2) exposure of BT474 cells up to 72 h demonstrated a 7.5 fold increase in SLC19A3 expression. The chemical hypoxia mimetic deferoxamine, resulted in an approximately 70 fold increase in SLC19A3 expression. Stable shRNA knockdown of HIF-1α reduced hypoxia mediated SLC19A3 upregulation by approximately 3 fold compared to scrambled construct. In conclusion, SLC19A3 transporter expression was observed to be upregulated under acute, chronic and DFO induced hypoxia. The attenuated increase in SLC19A3 expression after HIF-1α knockdown suggests a role for HIF-1α mediated pathways regulating SLC19A3 gene expression.
  RhoBTB2 or Deleted in Breast Cancer 2 (DBC2), identified as a candidate tumor suppressor gene for breast cancer and other human malignancies, is an atypical member of a novel gene family encoding small GTPases. In this study, we found that ectopic expression of RhoBTB2 resulted in inhibition of migration and invasion of human metastatic breast cancer cells line both MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435 with a dose-dependent manner. Western blotting analysis revealed that ectopic expression of RhoBTB2 induced a significant increase of breast cancer metastasis suppressor BRMS1. siRNA suppression of BRMS1 expression reversed markedly the inhibitory effects of RhoBTB2 on migration and invasion abilities of both MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435 cells. Ezrin is a member of the ezrin-radixin-moesin cytoskeleton-associated protein family and is a key signaling molecule that regulates cancer migration and invasion. Western blotting analysis demonstrated that ectopic expression of RhoBTB2 resulted in decreased phosphorylations of ezrin and Akt2 in both MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435 cells. Therefore, we concluded that upregulation of breast cancer metastasis suppressor BRMS1 and downregulation of phosphorylation of cancer metastasis-related gene ezrin contributed to RhoBTB2-induced inhibition of metastatic breast carcinoma cell migration and invasion. Our findings suggest that understanding RhoBTB2-mediated migration and invasion suppression is critical to the development of new therapies designed to prevent and treat patients with breast cancer metastasis.
  The activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) gene is induced by a variety of signals, including many of those encountered by cancer cells. We present evidence that ATF3 is induced by TGFβ in the MCF10CA1a breast cancer cells and plays an integral role for TGFβ to upregulate its target genes snail, slug and twist, and to enhance cell motility. Furthermore, ATF3 upregulates the expression of the TGFb gene itself, forming a positive-feedback loop for TGFβ signaling. Functionally, ectopic expression of ATF3 leads to morphological changes and alterations of markers consistent with epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). It also leads to features associated with breast-cancer-initiating cells: increased CD24(low)-CD44(high) population of cells, mammosphere formation and tumorigenesis. Conversely, knockdown of ATF3 reduces EMT, CD24(low)-CD44(high) cells and mammosphere formation. Importantly, knocking down twist, a downstream target, reduces the ability of ATF3 to enhance mammosphere formation, indicating the functional significance of twist in ATF3 action. To our knowledge, this is the first report demonstrating the ability of ATF3 to enhance breast cancer-initiating cell features and to feedback on TGFβ. Because ATF3 is an adaptive-response gene and is induced by various stromal signals, these findings have significant implications for how the tumor microenvironment might affect cancer development.
  Research has led to greater understanding of what is needed to create and sustain well-functioning public health partnerships. However, a partnership's ability to foster an environment that encourages broad member involvement in discussions, decision making, and activities has received scant empirical attention. This study examined the relationship between partnership members' perceptions of how well leadership and management facilitated their involvement, and their satisfaction with their role and influence within the partnership. Data came from 60 individuals who participated in two waves of a quantitative process evaluation of six southern interorganizational partnerships, formed as part of a national pilot project to increase cervical and breast cancer screening rates. Results suggested that environments fostering broad partner involvement were associated with measures of member satisfaction, controlling for other partnership characteristics. Findings indicated that facilitation of member involvement deserves increased consideration from researchers and practitioners as an indicator of the quality of partnership functioning.
  The role of the calcium- and phospholipid-binding protein annexin I (ANXA1) in cell cycle regulation has been investigated in estrogen receptor (ER)-positive MCF-7 and ER-negative MDA-MB-231 breast tumor cell lines. In MCF-7 cells, ANXA1-targeting small interfering RNA (siRNA) reduced ANXA1 mRNA and protein levels and attenuated cell proliferation induced by FCS, estradiol, or epidermal growth factor. Well-characterized agonists for the known ANXA1 receptor, FPR2, including the ANXA1 N-terminal proteolytic product ANXA1(2-26), lipoxin A(4) (LXA(4)), and the synthetic peptide, Trp-Lys-Tyr-Met-Val-D-Met (WKYMVm), stimulated proliferation of MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells that was attenuated by incubation with FPR2 antagonists WRW(4) (1 μ M) or Boc2 (100 nM) or by siRNA against FPR2. FCS-induced mitogenic responses were attenuated by each of the FPR antagonists and by siRNA against FPR2 and, to a lesser extent, FPR1. LXA(4) increased phosphorylation of Akt, p70(S6K) but not ERK1/2. Increases in cyclin D1 protein induced by FCS or LXA(4) were blocked by the PI3 kinase inhibitor, LY294002, and attenuated by FPR2 antagonism using Boc2. In invasive breast cancer, immunohistochemistry revealed the presence of ANXA1 and its receptor, FPR2, in both tumor epithelium and stromal cells. These observations suggest a novel signaling role for ANXA1 in mitogen-activated proliferation of breast tumor epithelial cells that is mediated via activation of FPR1 and FPR2.-Khau, T., Langenbach, S. Y., Schuliga, M., Harris, T., Johnstone, C. N., Anderson, R. L., Stewart, A. G. Annexin-1 signals mitogen-stimulated breast tumor cell proliferation by activation of the formyl peptide receptors (FPRs) 1 and 2.
  Abstract Long-term outcomes and hence the role of adjuvant therapy in patients with small (≤1 cm), node-negative breast cancer remain unclear. This study's objective was to evaluate whether human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER)-2 status is an independent, poor prognostic marker in patients with these tumors and to identify a subgroup of patients with these small tumors who might benefit from adjuvant systemic therapy. All patients with a diagnosis of a node-negative breast tumor measuring ≤1 cm and available HER-2 test results between January 1, 2001, and December 31, 2005, at the three Mayo Clinic sites were identified. Clinicopathologic data were compared in three groups: HER-2(-), HER-2(+), and triple-negative (TN) tumors. Of the 421 tumors identified, 364 (86.5%) were HER-2(-), 28 (6.7%) were HER-2(+), and 29 (6.9%) were TN. The median follow-up time was 1,015 days (range, 1-2,549 days). Groups were balanced in terms of patient age and tumor histology. Eleven patients with HER-2(-) tumors (3.0%), seven with HER-2(+) tumors (25.0%), and eight with TN tumors (27.6%) received adjuvant chemotherapy. Follow-up data were available for 357, 28, and 28 patients in the three groups, respectively. Death rates in the three groups were 6.4% (23 of 357) (one recurrence-related death), 0% (0 of 28), and 7.1% (2 of 28) (one recurrence-related death), respectively. During follow-up, the tumor recurred in nine patients: four were HER-2(-) tumors (1.1%), two were HER-2(+) tumors (7.1%), and three were TN tumors (10.7%). Patients with small, node-negative breast tumors have an excellent prognosis, but HER-2(+) and TN tumors appear to have a higher recurrence rate, warranting consideration for broad use and optimization of systemic adjuvant treatments.
  Abstract Purpose. The purpose of this article was to examine the relationship between age and lymph node ratio (LNR, number of positive nodes divided by number of examined nodes), and to determine their effects on breast cancer (BC) and overall mortality. Methods. Women aged ≥50 years, diagnosed in 1988-1997 with a unilateral histologically confirmed T1-T2 node positive surgically treated primary nonmetastatic BC, were selected from the National Cancer Institute's Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER). Generalized Additive Models for Location Scale and Shape (GAMLSS) were used to evaluate the age-LNR relationship. Cumulative incidence functions and multivariate competing risks analysis based on model selection by the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) were used to examine the effect of age and LNR on mortality. Low LNR was defined as ≤0.20, mid-LNR 0.21-0.65, and high LNR >0.65. Results. GAMLSS showed a nonlinear LNR-age relationship, increasing from mean LNR 0.26-0.28 at age 50-70 years to 0.30 at 80 years and 0.40 at 90 years. Compared with a 9.8% [95% confidence interval (CI) 8.8%-10.8%] risk of BC death at 5 years in women aged 50-59 years with low LNR, the risk in women ≥80 years with low LNR was 12.6% [95% CI 10.1%-15.0%], mid-LNR 18.1% [13.9%-22.1%], high LNR 29.8% [22.7%-36.1%]. Five-years overall risk of death increased from 40.8% [37.5%-43.9%] by low LNR to 67.4% [61.4%-72.4%] by high LNR. The overall mortality hazard ratio for age ≥80 years with high LNR was 7.49 [6.54-8.59], as compared with women aged 50-59 years with low LNR. Conclusion. High LNR combined with older age was associated with a threefold increased risk of BC death and a sevenfold increased hazard ratio of overall mortality.
  BACKGROUND: We examined whether mammographic density predicts risk of second breast cancers among patients with ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS). METHODS: The study included DCIS patients diagnosed during 1990 to 1997 and treated with breast-conserving surgery at Kaiser Permanente Northern California. Medical records were reviewed for clinical factors and subsequent breast cancers (DCIS and invasive). Ipsilateral mammograms from the index DCIS were assessed for density without knowledge of subsequent cancer status. Cox regression modeling was used to examine the association between mammographic density and risk of breast cancer events. RESULTS: Of the 935 eligible DCIS patients, 164 (18%) had a subsequent ipsilateral breast cancer, and 59 (6%) had a new primary cancer in the contralateral breast during follow-up (median, 103 mo). Those with the greatest total area of density (upper 20% of values) were at increased risk for invasive disease in either breast [hazard ratio (HR), 2.1; 95% confidence interval (95% CI), 1.2-3.8] or any cancer (DCIS or invasive) in the ipsilateral (HR, 1.7; 95% CI, 1.0-2.9) or contralateral (HR, 3.0; 95% CI, 1.3-6.9) breast compared with those with the smallest area of density (bottom 20%). HRs for these same end points comparing those in the highest with those in the lowest American College of Radiology Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System category were 1.6 (95% CI, 0.7-3.6), 1.3 (95% CI, 0.7-2.6), and 5.0 (95% CI, 1.4-17.9), respectively. There was a suggestion of increasing risk of contralateral, but not ipsilateral, cancer with increasing percent density. CONCLUSIONS: Women with mammographically dense breasts may be at higher risk of subsequent breast cancer, especially in the contralateral breast. IMPACT: Information about mammographic density may help with DCIS treatment decisions.
  Signal transducing adaptor protein-2 (STAP-2) is a recently identified adaptor protein, which contains pleckstrin homology (PH) and Src homology 2 (SH2)-like domains, as well as a signal transducer and an activator of transcription 3 (STAT3)-binding motif in its C-terminal region. STAP-2 is also a substrate of breast tumor kinase (Brk). In breast cancers, Brk expression is deregulated and it promotes STAT3-dependent cell proliferation. In the present study, manipulated STAP-2 expression demonstrated essential roles of STAP-2 in Brk-mediated STAT3 activation. STAP-2 interacts with both Brk and STAT3. In addition, small-interfering RNA-mediated reduction of endogenous STAP-2 expression strongly decreased Brk-mediated STAT3 activation in T47D breast cancer cells. The PH domain of STAP-2 is involved in multiple steps; the binding between Brk and STAP-2, the activation and tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT3, and the activation of Brk. Notably, a STAP-2 PH-Brk fusion protein exhibited robust kinase activity and increased activation and tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT3. Finally, STAP-2-knockdown in T47D cells induced a significant decrease of proliferation, as strong as that of Brk- or STAT3-knockdown. Taken together, our findings are likely to inform the development of a novel therapeutic strategy, as well as the determination of novel prognostic values, in breast carcinomas.
  BACKGROUND: There are no reliable and valid instruments in Mexico for breast cancer patients. Our objective was to measure reliability and validity of a Spanish version of the FACT-B (Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy-Breast) questionnaire in Mexican population. METHODS: The translation of the questionnaire was reviewed and minor changes were made. The instrument was applied to 142 patients recently diagnosed with breast cancer. It was applied to 105 for the second time, and to 75 for the third time. An analysis of item discrimination was made. The questionnaire's reliability was determined by Cronbach's alpha. Concurrent validity was determined by an analysis of correlations between the instrument's scales and EORTC's QLQ C-30 y BR-23 scales. RESULTS: The five FACT-B subscales were reliable, their alpha coefficients varied between 0.65 and 0.82. The entire scale obtained a value of 0.87. The correlation analysis between FACT-B and EORTC QLQ C-30 subscales indicated that the same construct was being evaluated. CONCLUSIONS: FACT-B is a valid, reliable and sensitive instrument to measuring quality life in Mexican breast cancer patients.
  INTRODUCTION: Basic research has indicated that tocotrienols have potent antiproliferative and proapoptotic effects that would be expected to reduce the effect of breast cancer. METHODS: We conducted a double-blinded, placebo-controlled pilot trial to test the effectiveness of adjuvant tocotrienol therapy in combination with tamoxifen for five years in women with early breast cancer. Two-hundred-forty women, aged between 40-60 years, with either tumor node metastases (TNM) Stage I or II breast cancer and estrogen receptor (ER) positive tumors were non-randomly assigned to two groups. The intervention group received tocotrienol rich fraction (TRF) plus tamoxifen whilst the control group received placebo plus tamoxifen, for five years. RESULTS: During the five years of study, 8 patients died due to breast cancer while 36 patients developed local or systemic recurrence. Five-year breast cancer specific survival was 98.3% (95% confidence interval (CI): 95.9% to 100%) in the intervention group and 95%, (95% CI: 91.1% to 98.9%) in the control group, while 5-years disease free survival was 86.7% (95% CI: 80.6% to 92.8%) and 83.3% (95% CI: 76.6% to 90.0%), respectively. Risk of mortality due to breast cancer was 60% (HR: 0.40; 95% CI: 0.08 to 2.05) lower in the intervention group versus the controls following adjustment for age, ethnicity, stage and lymph node status but this was not statistically significant. Adjuvant TRF therapy was not associated with breast cancer recurrence (HR: 0.84; 95% CI: 0.43-1.65). CONCLUSIONS: From the current study, there seems to be no association between adjuvant tocotrienol therapy and breast cancer specific survival in women with early breast cancer. Trial registration: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01157026.
  BACKGROUND: Activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM) is implicated in the prognosis of multiple cancers with low level expression associated with metastasis and early death in breast cancer. Despite this significance, mechanisms that regulate ALCAM gene expression and ALCAM's role in adhesion of pre-metastatic circulating tumor cells have not been defined. We studied ALCAM expression in 20 tumor cell lines by real-time PCR, western blot and immunochemistry. Epigenetic alterations of the ALCAM promoter were assessed using methylation-specific PCR and bisulfite sequencing. ALCAM's role in adhesion of tumor cells to the vascular wall was studied in isolated perfused lungs. RESULTS: A common site for transcription initiation of the ALCAM gene was identified and the ALCAM promoter sequenced. The promoter contains multiple cis-active elements including a functional p65 NF-Kappa B motif, and it harbors an extensive array of CpG residues highly methylated exclusively in ALCAM-negative tumor cells. These CpG residues were modestly demethylated after 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine treatment. Restoration of high-level ALCAM expression using an ALCAM cDNA increased clustering of MDA-MB-435 tumor cells perfused through the pulmonary vasculature of ventilated rat lungs. Anti-ALCAM antibodies reduced the number of intravascular tumor cell clusters. CONCLUSION: Our data suggests that loss of ALCAM expression, due in part to DNA methylation of extensive segments of the promoter, significantly impairs the ability of circulating tumor cells to adhere to each other, and may therefore promote metastasis. These findings offer insight into the mechanisms for down-regulation of ALCAM gene expression in tumor cells, and for the positive prognostic value of high-level ALCAM in breast cancer.
  INTRODUCTION: Tyrosine phosphorylated signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (pStat3) is present in numerous cancers and is required for mediating tumorigenesis. Autocrine and paracrine interleukin (IL)-6 signaling is the principal mechanism by which Stat3 is persistently phosphorylated in epithelial tumors including breast, lung, colon and gastric cancer. The Ras oncogene mediates cellular transformation without evidence of pStat3 in cultured cells. Recently, however non-tyrosine phosphorylated Stat3 was shown to have a transcriptional activating function, a role in mitochondrial function and to mediate cell migration.. Here we examined the role of Stat3 in Ras mediated transformation. METHODS: Ha-rasV12 transformed mammary epithelial cells (MCF10A) cells were transduced with a Stat3shRNA, IL-6shRNA and/or treated with inhibitors of Janus kinases (JAKs) to examine the role of the IL-6 signaling pathway in Ras mediated invasion and tumorigenesis. RESULTS: Cellular migration, invasion, anchorage independent growth and tumorigenesis were largely abrogated in the Stat3-reduced cells compared to control cells. Analysis of MCF10A-Ras tumors revealed high levels of pStat3 and interleukin-6. Tumors derived from transgenic MMTV-K-Ras mice were also found to express pStat3 and IL-6. MCF10A-Ras cells, when grown in a three-dimensional Matrigel culture system revealed the appearance of the junctional protein E-Cadherin as a consequence of reducing Stat3 levels or inhibiting Stat3 activity. Decreasing IL-6 levels in the MCF10A-Ras cells abrogated tumorigenesis and reduced cell migration. By isolating Ras-expressing primary tumors and serially passaging these cells in two-dimensional culture led to a decrease in IL-6 and pStat3 levels with the reappearance of E-Cadherin. CONCLUSIONS: The cellular and environmental context can lead to differential IL-6/pStat3 signaling and a dependency on this cytokine and transcription factor for migration, invasion and tumorigenesis.
  Lysyl oxidase (LOX) is an extracellular enzyme critical for the cross-linking of collagens and elastin. The LOX gene has also been shown to inhibit the transforming activity of Ras oncogene signaling. Recently, a single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of LOX G473A (rs1800449) has been demonstrated to be associated with increased risk of breast cancer in African American women. In this hospital-based case&#x2013;control study, the association of LOX polymorphism with breast cancer susceptibility in Chinese Han population was investigated. In total, 238 female patients with breast cancer and 234 age-matched healthy controls recruited were genotyped. We found a significant difference in the frequency of the LOX G473A genotype between the breast cancer and control groups. Individuals with GA genotype showed a 2.79-fold (95% confidence interval&#x2009;=&#x2009;1.87&#x2013;4.16) increased risk of breast cancer compared with subjects carrying GG genotype (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001). Further statistical analysis revealed that this polymorphism was an independent parameter with regard to other variables that are significantly associated with breast cancer, that is, age, menopausal status, estrogen exposure interval, expression status of estrogen receptor, and progesterone receptor. These findings suggest that the LOX 473 GA genotype is independently associated with increased risk of breast cancer in Chinese female population.
  Mucinous infiltrating invasive ductal adenocarcinoma consists of 2&#x2013;4% invasive breast cancer, but is a very interesting type due to its macroscopic similarity to non-special-type (NST) ductal carcinoma. The macroscopic similarity of mucinous and infiltrating ductal carcinoma NST adenocarcinomas consists of a loose and edematous stroma, which is often seen in portions of NST carcinoma and may mimic the mucin pools of mucinous carcinoma. In this study the authors examined the ultrastructural differences between mucinous carcinoma and infiltrating ductal carcinoma NST. They also examined the protein expression of the tissues by 2D electrophoresis due to their belief that from the results of these two levels it is possible to understand the changes that take place both in the ultrastructural and biochemical levels in these two types of breast cancer. The ultrastructural results from mucinous carcinoma have shown many changes in cytoplasmic organelles in comparison to normal samples, depending on the grade and the number of metastatic lymph nodes. At the 2D elecrophoresis level the authors studied two interesting polypeptides, calreticulin and thioredoxin. Both of these proteins were found in patterns of fibroadenoma, mucinous carcinoma, and NST carcinoma, but with different quantitative expression among them. In the future the quantitative differences of these two proteins may provide specific tumor markers for these two types of carcinoma.
  Semiconducting polymer dots (Pdots) represent a new class of ultrabright fluorescent probes for biological imaging. They exhibit several important characteristics for experimentally demanding in vitro and in vivo fluorescence studies, such as their high brightness, fast emission rate, excellent photostability, nonblinking, and nontoxic feature. However, controlling the surface chemistry and bioconjugation of Pdots has been a challenging problem that prevented their widespread applications in biological studies. Here, we report a facile yet powerful conjugation method that overcomes this challenge. Our strategy for Pdot functionalization is based on entrapping heterogeneous polymer chains into a single dot, driven by hydrophobic interactions during nanoparticle formation. A small amount of amphiphilic polymer bearing functional groups is co-condensed with the majority of semiconducting polymers to modify and functionalize the nanoparticle surface for subsequent covalent conjugation to biomolecules, such as streptavidin and immunoglobulin G (IgG). The Pdot bioconjugates can effectively and specifically label cellular targets, such as cell surface marker in human breast cancer cells, without any detectable nonspecific binding. Single-particle imaging, cellular imaging, and flow cytometry experiments indicate a much higher fluorescence brightness of Pdots compared to those of Alexa dye and quantum dot probes. The successful bioconjugation of these ultrabright nanoparticles presents a novel opportunity to apply versatile semiconducting polymers to various fluorescence measurements in modern biology and biomedicine.
  OBJECTIVE: To explore the immune response induced by HER2/neu oncogene in the breast cancer (BC) carcinogenesis process and the immunological mechanism of Ru'ai Shuhou Recipe (RSR) in the prevention and treatment of BC. METHODS: HER2/neu transgenic spontaneous breast tumor model mice were fed with RSR from 5 weeks old, the occurrence of breast tumor in them was observed, and the changes of T cell-mediated immune response and associated cytokines were detected during the carcinogenesis process, i. e., when mice aged between 15 and 25 weeks. RESULTS: RSR showed significant effects in postponing and reducing the carcinogenesis of primary breast tumor, up-regulating the amount of T cell in splenic lymphocyte in tumor-bearing mice, promoting the proliferation of T lymphocyte, and inducing the secretion of cytokines such as interleukin-2, interleukin-12 and interferon-y. CONCLUSIONS: A serial immune response reveals in the carcinogenesis process. The immunologic function of HER-2/neu transgenic mice is significantly different to that of the same strain non-transgenic mice. Effect of RSR in preventing and postponing breast cancer carcinogenesis is possibly realized through enhancing the anti-tumor immune response of transgenic mice themselves.
  Splenic metastases are rare. Usually, they are part of a disseminated disease and located on the splenic capsule. Common sources are breast cancer, lung cancer and malignant melanoma. SoLitary splenic metastases are rare, usuaLLy located in the splenic parenchyma and metastasizing via the hematogenous route. Splenic metastases from ovarian carcinoma are usuaLly part of a disseminated disease, located on the splenic capsule and metastasize via the peritoneum. Splenic metastases from endometriaL carcinoma are usuaLLy solitary, Located in the splenic parenchyma and metastasize via the hematogenous route. Splenic metastases from cervical carcinoma are divided equally between metastases as part of a disseminated disease and soLitary metastases. Less than 100 cases of solitary splenic metastases have been reported with half of them being metastases from female genital tract malignancies: 30--ovarian carcinoma; 11--endometriaL carcinoma; 8--cervical carcinoma; and 1--tubal carcinoma. Few cases have been reported of splenic rupture because of metastases from choriocarcinoma. Splenic metastases as part of a disseminated disease are associated with poor prognosis, and splenectomy--apart from cases in which it might assist in achieving optimaL debulking--is not effective. Solitary splenic metastases represent a more moderate disease and the treatment of choice is splenectomy. SoLitary splenic metastases may be detected after an interval from the diagnosis of the primary disease. Hence, patients who had been treated for female genital tract malignancy, even if they are asymptomatic, need a long-term follow-up, including serial imaging studies of the spleen.
  BACKGROUND: HER2 is an important prognostic and predictive marker in invasive breast cancer. It is currently assessed by immunohistochemistry for protein over-expression and by fluorescence in situ hybridization for gene amplification. The immunohistochemistry-equivocal cases (2+) are currently retested by FISH to determine eligibility for trastuzumab treatment. Retesting by FISH significantly raises the cost of patient management and sometimes delays treatment. The 4B5 is a new, FDA-approved, rabbit monoclonal antibody for HER2 testing. OBJECTIVES: To examine the reliability of 4B5 IHC HER2 testing in cases found by CB11 IHC to be HER2 status equivocal. METHODS: Twenty-eight invasive breast cancer cases, with an equivocal HER2 status by CB11 IHC, were retested by the 4B5 antibody as well as by FISH analysis. The scoring was performed using the same guidelines as HercepTest and was correlated with the FISH ratio. RESULTS: Of the original 28 CB11 clone designated equivocal cases, 14 (50%) showed negative HER2 staining using the 4B5 clone (HercepTest score 0 and 1+). Five cases (18%) proved to be positive (HercepTest score 3+) and 9 cases (32%) remained equivocal (HercepTest score 2+). The corresponding FISH ratio results showed that all 4B5 negative cases were negative by FISH testing, with a negative predictive value of 100%; 4 of 5 of the 4B5-positive cases were positive by FISH testing, with a positive predictive value of 80%. One 4B5-positive case was borderline-high (2.2 ratio) by FISH. The correlation between 4B5 IHC and FISH was statistically significant (P = 0.0013) by chi-square test. CONCLUSIONS: Sequential testing by 4B5 IHC could greatly reduce the need for FISH testing in cases considered HER2 equivocal by CB11 IHC.
  Efrapeptins (EF), a family of fungal peptides, inhibit proteasomal enzymatic activities and the in vitro and in vivo growth of HT-29 cells. They are also known inhibitors of F(1)F(0)-ATPase, a mitochondrial enzyme that functions as an Hsp90 co-chaperone. We have previously shown that treatment of cancer cells with EF results in disruption of the Hsp90:F(1)F(0)-ATPase complex and inhibition of Hsp90 chaperone activity. The present study examines the effect of EF on breast cancer growth in vitro and in vivo. As a monotherapy, EF inhibited cell proliferation in vitro with an IC(50) value ranging from 6 nM to 3.4 μM. Inhibition of Hsp90 chaperone function appeared to be the dominant mechanism of action and the factor determining cellular sensitivity to EF. In vitro inhibition of proteasome became prominent in the absence of adequate levels of Hsp90 and F(1)F(0)-ATPase as in the case of the relatively EF-resistant MDA-MB-231 cell line. In vivo, EF inhibited MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 xenograft growth with a maximal inhibition of 60% after administration of 0.15 and 0.3 mg/kg EF, respectively. 2-Deoxyglucose (2DG), a known inhibitor of glycolysis, acted synergistically with EF in vitro and antagonistically in vivo. In vitro, the synergistic effect was attributed to a prolonged endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. In vivo, the antagonistic effect was ascribed to the downregulation of tumoral and/or stromal F(1)F(0)-ATPase by 2DG.
  The majority of cell culture studies have assessed the effect of hormones on cancer cell growth using media supplemented with charcoal-treated fetal bovine serum (CTS). We aimed to determine whether using a system more reflective of the human condition by changing the charcoal-treated serum to an untreated pooled human serum (PHS) resulted in the same hormone responses in breast and prostate cell lines. MCF-7 breast cancer, MCF-10A non-transformed breast, and LNCaP prostate cancer cell lines supplemented with PHS were treated with high and low physiological concentrations of six hormones (17β-estradiol, dehydroepiandosterone (DHEA), dihydrotestosterone (DHT), testosterone, insulin, and glucagon). Cell growth was measured after 72 h of incubation. All hormones stimulated growth of MCF-7 cells (p < 0.05). MCF-10A cell growth was inhibited by DHEA, DHT, and testosterone (p < 0.05), unaffected by 17β-estradiol and glucagon, and stimulated by insulin (p < 0.05). LNCaP cell growth was stimulated by the highest concentration of DHEA and DHT (p < 0.05) and inhibited by the highest concentration of 17β-estradiol (p < 0.05), while insulin and testosterone, had no effect. Overall, PHS lowered the magnitude of the effect of hormones on cell growth in comparison to CTS. Due to the presence of all serum constituents, our model represents a more appropriate physiological environment for determining the effect of hormones on cancer cell growth. Further studies are required to determine the mechanisms by which added hormones interact with the constituents of untreated human serum.
  Non-breast-cancer deaths currently account for almost half of deaths among breast carcinoma patients in the 15 years following diagnosis. Understanding the trends of non-breast-cancer death is vital for calibrating treatment and survival expectations, and for understanding the consequences of potentially toxic therapies. To observe trends over time in non-breast-cancer relative survival-the non-breast-cancer survival rates of breast cancer patients relative to the non-breast-cancer survival rates of the population as a whole, matched for gender, race, age, region, and year of diagnosis. Non-breast-cancer relative survival between breast carcinoma patients and the general population was measured using SEER public-use data of patients diagnosed with breast carcinoma between 1973 and 2007. Non-breast-cancer relative survival improved significantly from 1973 to the present. From 1986 onward, the non-breast-cancer survival rate among breast carcinoma patients is equal to, or slightly higher than, matched populations who did not have breast carcinoma. This improvement over time occurred across almost all patient stratifications, including race, age, tumor size, and nodal status. However, patients receiving full mastectomies, and patients not receiving radiotherapy experienced no increase in relative survival. The most dramatic relative survival improvements occurred in patients who received radiation and patients receiving partial mastectomies, and such improvements were seen even after controlling for changes in tumor size over time. Non-breast-cancer relative survival among breast carcinoma patients has improved significantly since 1973; breast cancer patients are currently no more likely to die of other causes than the general population.
  Male breast cancer (MBC) is an uncommon disease with a frequency of approximately one in 1000. Due to the rarity of MBC, it is understudied and its etiology is poorly understood. Our objectives are to determine the frequency of pathogenic mutations in BRCA2 and PALB2 in MBC cases and to investigate the correlations between mutation status and cancer phenotypes. Single strand conformation polymorphism analysis, direct sequencing, and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification were employed to screen for mutations in the BRCA2 gene, followed by direct sequencing of the PALB2 gene in BRCA2-negative MBC cases. Pathogenic BRCA2 mutations were identified in 18 of the 115 MBC cases, including four of the ten cases (40%) from breast cancer families and 14 of the 105 cases (13%) unselected for family history of breast cancer. The difference in BRCA2-mutation frequencies between cases with and without family history of breast cancer was not statistically significant (P = 0.145), suggesting that family history is not a strong predictor of carrying a mutation in males. We observed a highly significant association of carrying a pathogenic BRCA2 mutation with high tumor grade (P < 0.001) and a weak association with positive lymph nodes (P < 0.02). Of the 97 BRCA2-negative MBC cases, we identified one PALB2 mutation with confirmed pathogenicity and one mutation predicted to be pathogenic, a prevalence of pathogenic PALB2-mutation of 1-2%. Based on our results and previous studies, genetic testing for BRCA2 should be recommended for any diagnosed MBC case, regardless of family history of breast cancer.

  OBJECTIVE: To investigate the potential association between domestic exposure to light at night (LAN) and the risk of human breast cancer. METHODS: A case-control study of female breast cancer was conducted in Connecticut. A total of 363 incident breast cancer cases and 356 age frequency-matched controls were interviewed using a standardized, structured questionnaire to obtain information on sleeping patterns and bedroom light environment. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated by unconditional multivariate logistic regression. RESULTS: A non-significantly increased risk of breast cancer was observed among postmenopausal women for those keeping lights on while sleeping (OR = 1.4, 95% CI 0.7, 2.7), those who reported mainly sleeping in the daytime (OR = 1.4, 95% CI 0.5, 4.3), and those not drawing the curtains/window shades while sleeping at night (OR = 1.2, 95% CI 0.8, 1.9). CONCLUSION: The results from this study suggest a potential increased risk of breast cancer associated with domestic exposure to LAN. Further studies with larger sample size are needed to confirm the results.
  PURPOSE: Prophylactic lamivudine to prevent chemotherapy-induced hepatitis B virus (HBV) reactivation has been widely adopted in hematological cancer patients. We examined the deferred preemptive strategy, upon rising viremia, in breast cancer (BC) patients based on sensitive serum HBV DNA level monitoring in a non-randomized controlled study. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Baseline virological profiles before cytotoxic chemotherapy were retrospectively analyzed in historical BC and non-BC patients. A prospective cohort study, including 22 early BC patients (Group I) who were hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)± and required adjuvant chemotherapy, were enrolled and had deferred preemptive use of lamivudine upon viremic surge. During the study period, another 23 BC patients, who did not participate in the abovementioned study, received prophylactic use of lamivudine as routine practice (Group 2). Chemotherapy-induced hepatitis events and the lamivudine treatment course were compared. RESULTS: There was no significant difference in the incidence of hepatitis during chemotherapy between these two groups. Patients in Group I had statistically significant shorter duration of lamivudine use during chemotherapy. However, once lamivudine had been initiated, the treatment course is not significantly shorter than those patients given prophylactically. CONCLUSIONS: Deferred preemptive strategy is feasible to control HBV replication and prevent its reactivation in BC patients undergoing chemotherapy. However, it may not be superior to prophylactic strategy and clinically practical.
  Active targeting of a drug carrier to a specific target site is crucial to provide a safe and efficient delivery of therapeutics and imaging contrast agents. E-selectin expression is induced on the endothelial cell surface of vessels in response to inflammatory stimuli but is absent in the normal vessels. Thus, E-selectin is an attractive molecular target, and high affinity ligands for E-selectin could be powerful tools for the delivery of therapeutics and/or imaging agents to inflamed vessels. In this study, we identified a thiophosphate modified aptamer (thioaptamer, TA) against E-selectin (ESTA-1) by employing a two-step selection strategy: a recombinant protein-based TA binding selection from a combinatorial library followed by a cell-based TA binding selection using E-selectin expressing human microvascular endothelial cells. ESTA-1 selectively bound to E-selectin with nanomolar binding affinity (K(D) = 47 nM) while exhibiting minimal cross reactivity to P- and L-selectin. Furthermore, ESTA-1 binding to E-selectin on the endothelial cells markedly antagonized the adhesion (over 75% inhibition) of sLe(x) positive HL-60 cells at nanomolar concentration. ESTA-1 also bound specifically to the inflamed tumor-associated vasculature of human carcinomas derived from breast, ovarian, and skin but not to normal organs, and this binding was highly associated with the E-selectin expression level. Similarly, intravenously injected ESTA-1 demonstrated distinct binding to the tumor vasculature in a breast cancer xenograft model. Together, our data substantiates the discovery of a thioaptamer (ESTA-1) that binds to E-selectin with high affinity and specificity, thereby highlighting the potential application of ESTA-1 for E-selectin targeted delivery.
  Cyclophosphamide therapy may rarely cause pigmentation of the nails which is of different patterns. We report a patient who developed pigmentation of nails after six cycles of cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-flourouracil chemotherapy, each repeated after 28 days for breast cancer. The patient developed nail pigmentation that started proximally and spread distally and involved all the nails of both hands and feet except the second and third toenails of right foot. Using Naranjo ADR Probability Scale, the case revealed a "probable" association with cyclophosphamide.
  Accelerated partial breast irradiation (APBI) with high dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy offers an excellent compact course of radiation due to its limited number of fractions for early-stage carcinoma of breast. One of the recent devices is SAVI (strut-adjusted volume implant), which has 6, 8 or 10 peripheral source channels with one center channel. Each channel can be differentially loaded. This paper focuses on the treatment planning, dosimetry and quality assurance aspects of HDR brachytherapy implant with GammaMed Plus HDR afterloader unit. The accelerated PBI balloon devices normally inflate above 35 cc range, and hence these balloon type devices cannot be accommodated in small lumpectomy cavity sizes. CT images were obtained and 3-D dosimetric plans were done with Brachyvision planning system. The 3-D treatment planning and dosimetric data were evaluated with planning target volume (PTV)_eval V90, V95, V150, V200 skin dose and minimum distance to skin. With the use of the SAVI 6-1 mini device, we were able to accomplish an excellent coverage - V90, V95, V150 and V200 to 98%, 95%, 37 cc (<50 cc volume) and 16 cc (<20 cc volume), respectively. Maximum skin dose was between 73% and 90%, much below the prescribed dose of 34 Gy. The minimum skin distance achieved was 5 to 11 mm. The volume that received 50% of the prescribed radiation dose was found to be lower with SAVI. The multi-channel SAVI-based implants reduced the maximum skin dose to markedly lower levels as compared to other modalities, simultaneously achieving best dose coverage to target volume. Differential-source dwell-loading allows modulation of the radiation dose distribution in symmetric or asymmetric opening of the catheter shapes and is also advantageous in cavities close to chest wall.
  Vinflunine (VFL) is the first bifluorinated tubulin-targeted agent obtained through a semi synthetic process using superacidic chemistry. Pharmacologic models evidenced a high degree of activity from several cancer lines. The intravenous formulation of VFL (Javlor, Pierre Fabre Medicament, Boulogne, France) is registered for bladder cancer and is undergoing Phase III trials for nonsmall cell lung and breast cancer. To support most of the pharmacokinetic studies in humans, a sensitive high-performance liquid chromatography bioanalytical method coupled with ultraviolet detection was developed and validated for the simultaneous quantification of VFL and its active metabolite 4-O-deacetylvinflunine. The two compounds, together with 17-bromovinorelbine, used as an internal standard, were extracted from blood (1 mL) by a liquid-liquid process under basic conditions using diethyl ether. The organic phase was then back-extracted with HCl 0.1 mol/L. Analysis was performed through a cyano column and detection was set at 268 nm. Total analysis run time was less than 15 minutes. The assay was sensitive for the two compounds to at least 2 ng/mL and calibration curves were linear up to 200 ng/mL. The between-run imprecision and the mean inaccuracy were lower than 7% and 8.3%, respectively. Blood samples were stable when stored at -70°C over 24 months. The long-term reproducibility and the suitability of this analytical method were demonstrated through the analysis of about 6000 biologic samples during the clinical development of intravenous VFL. This method is adequately sensitive to monitor the blood concentrations observed at the recommended dose defined in a clinical setting.
  Mitomycin C (MMC) is an effective cytostatic agent used in the treatment of patients with gynecological malignancies and breast carcinoma. This review presents and discusses the current treatment options with MMC in patients with breast, cervical, and vulvar carcinomas, as well as rarer gynecological malignancies. New combinations and developments are also presented and their potential clinical relevance is examined. Consequently, also for the next years a MMC-containing chemotherapy continues to be a relevant part of an individualized therapy despite numerous innovative new drugs, especially for the salvage therapy of metastatic breast cancer and the simultaneous radiochemotherapy of other gynecological malignancies.
  Several human breast cancer cell lines have been shown to contain mutational activation of Ras oncogenes. The goal of this review is to clarify the physiology and biochemical pathways of Ras family oncogenes in order to understand thoroughly the mechanisms behind Ras gene mutations. Ras genes are involved in the early stages of mammary oncogenesis through augmented expression of the normal p21 protein. Recognition of the mechanisms resulting in aberrant expression of Ras, as well as unveiling the influence of the Ras family gene activation in the Ras signaling pathway, should have a major impact on clarifying the oncogenetic process, possibly offering candidate therapy and prevention strategies.
  BACKGROUND: Filgrastim was developed to treat chemotherapy-induced neutropenia. This phase III study was designed to demonstrate bioequivalence of Amgen filgrastim and a biosimilar filgrastim developed by Hospira (Study GCF071; sponsored by Hospira). PATIENTS AND METHODS: Breast cancer patients suitable for treatment with doxorubicin and docetaxel in the neoadjuvant/adjuvant or first-line metastatic setting were enrolled at 37 European centers. Patients were randomized (2:1) to receive Hospira filgrastim or Amgen filgrastim, after the end of chemotherapy. Filgrastim (5 μg/kg/day) was administered under double-blind conditions. Primary endpoint to demonstrate bioequivalence was duration of severe neutropenia (DSN) in cycle 1. RESULTS: 184 patients were randomized to Hospira filgrastim and 95 to Amgen filgrastim. Mean DSN in cycle 1 was similar with Hospira filgrastim (1.6 days; n = 165) and Amgen filgrastim (1.3 days; n = 85), meeting predefined criteria for bioequivalence. Secondary endpoints supporting bioequivalence included mean time to absolute neutrophil count recovery and incidence of febrile neutropenia. The most common treatment-related adverse event with Hospira filgrastim was grade 1-2 bone pain. CONCLUSIONS: Hospira filgrastim and Amgen filgrastim are bioequivalent in efficacy with similar safety profiles. Hospira filgrastim may be useful for the prophylaxis of complications related to neutropenia caused by chemotherapy.
  Aim. The study was to evaluate the effect of the dietary supplement BreastDefend (BD) on the proliferation and invasive behavior of highly metastatic human breast cancer cells in vitro. METHODS: Cell proliferation and cytotoxicity of BD was evaluated in MDA-MB-231 cells treated with BD (0-40 μg/mL) by MTT assay and trypan blue staining, respectively. Expression of cell cycle regulatory genes were determined by DNA-microarray analysis. Effect of BD on invasiveness was assessed by cellular adhesion, migration, and invasion assays. RESULTS: BD treatment of cells MDA-MB-231 resulted in the cytostatic inhibition of cell proliferation with IC(50) 22.2, 19.1, and 17.5 μg/mL for 24, 48, and 72 hours, respectively. The inhibition of proliferation was mediated by the upregulation expression of CCNG1, CHEK1, CDKN1C, GADD45A, and E2F2, whereas BD downregulated expression of CCNA1 and CDK6 genes. The induction of expression of GADD45A and inhibition of expression of cyclin A1 (gene CCNA1) by BD was also confirmed on the protein level. BD treatment suppressed the invasive behavior of MDA-MB-231 cells by the inhibition of cellular adhesion, migration, and invasion. This inhibition of invasiveness was mediated by the suppression of secretion of urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA), and by the downregulation of expression of CXCR4 in breast cancer cells treated with BD. CONCLUSION: BD inhibits proliferation and invasive behavior of the highly metastatic human breast cancer cells in vitro. BD may have a therapeutic potential for prevention or treatment of highly metastatic breast cancers.
  Oesophageal cancer presents as advanced disease; in the majority of patients the symptoms are present for many months prior to diagnosis. Dysphagia has been described as the key to an early diagnosis of oesophageal cancer. This study aims to assess the public perception of the importance of this symptom. Ninety-six patients completed a questionnaire. This evaluated patient understanding of symptoms of dysphagia compared to the finding of a breast lump, haemoptysis, chest pain and loss of weight concerning urgency, probable cause of symptoms and treatment required. Sixty-five patients (71%) would visit their GP within 24 h of finding a breast lump or suffering from haemoptysis (82%) or having chest pain (82%). Forty-seven patients (51%) who experienced dysphagia would seek medical advice after one week and further 18 (19%) after one month (P<0.0001). Only eight patients (10%) associated dysphagia with cancer compared to 53 patients (57%) with the finding of a breast lump (P<0.031). This study concludes that there is poor understanding of the main symptoms of oesophageal cancer. New health campaigns are needed if the cancer is to be detected at an earlier and potentially curable stage. Keywords: Oesophageal cancer; Awareness; Education.
  Sphingosine kinase 1 (SK1) is an enzyme that catalyses the phosphorylation of sphingosine to produce the bioactive lipid sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P). We demonstrate here that the SK1 inhibitor, SKi (2-(p-hydroxyanilino)-4-(p-chlorophenyl)thiazole) induces the proteasomal degradation of SK1 in human pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells, androgen-sensitive LNCaP prostate cancer cells, MCF-7 and MCF-7 HER2 breast cancer cells and that this is likely mediated by ceramide as a consequence of catalytic inhibition of SK1 by SKi. Moreover, SK1 is polyubiquitinated under basal conditions, and SKi appears to increase the degradation of SK1 by activating the proteasome. In addition, the proteasomal degradation of SK1a and SK1b in androgen-sensitive LNCaP cells is associated with the induction of apoptosis. However, SK1b in LNCaP-AI cells (androgen-independent) is less sensitive to SKi-induced proteasomal degradation and these cells are resistant to SKi-induced apoptosis, thereby highlighting the ubiquitin-proteasomal degradation of SK1 as an important mechanism controlling cell survival.
  Our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying the pharmacological actions of estrogen receptor (ER) ligands has evolved considerably in recent years. Much of this knowledge has come from a detailed dissection of the mechanism(s) of action of the Selective Estrogen Receptor Modulators (SERMs) tamoxifen and raloxifene, so called for their ability to function as ER agonists or antagonists depending on the tissue in which they operate. These mechanistic insights have had a significant impact on the discovery of second generation SERMs, some of which are in late stage clinical development for the treatment/prevention of breast cancer as well as other estrogenopathies. In addition to the SERMs, however, have emerged the Selective Estrogen Degraders (SERDs), which as their name suggests, interact with and facilitate ER turnover in cells. One drug of this class, fulvestrant, has been approved as a third line treatment for ER-positive metastatic breast cancer. Whereas the first generation SERMs/SERDs were discovered in a serendipitous manner, this review will highlight how our understanding of the molecular pharmacology of ER ligands has been utilized in the development of the next generation of SERMs/SERDs, some of which are likely to have a major impact on the pharmacotherapy of breast cancer.
  BACKGROUND: We report our experience of using a totally implantable access port (TIAP) through the external jugular vein (EJV) when the cephalic vein (CV) approach is not feasible. METHODS: We reviewed 197 cases involving TIAP implantation through the EJV in a single medical center between January 1995 and January 2009. All the ports were implanted after the CV approach was found unfeasible. Patient characteristics, operating time, and early and late complications were recorded. RESULTS: The mean patient age was 50 years (range: 33-75). The mean operating time was 54.5 ± 7.5 minutes. Early complications within the first 30 postoperative days included port hematoma (2%) and catheter migration (2%). The late postoperative complications included catheter occlusion (2.5%), venous thrombosis (2%), and port infection (1.5%). There were no complications associated with TIAP disconnection. CONCLUSIONS: The EJV approach is an easy and safe alternative method for TIAP implantation when the CV approach is not feasible. This method can avoid conversion to percutaneous puncture of the subclavian vein, which could result in life-threatening complications such as pneumothorax and hemothorax. In patients with breast cancer or those who are contraindicated for TIAP implantation on the opposite side, the EJV cutdown approach provides an alternative route with comfortable and satisfactory results as complications with this approach are rare.
  A rapid and sensitive ultra performance liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS) method has been developed and validated for the simultaneous quantitative determination of dextromethorphan (DM) and its metabolites dextrorphan (DX), 3-methoxymorphinan (3MM) and 3-hydroxymorphinan (3HM), in human lithium heparinized plasma. The extraction involved a simple liquid-liquid extraction with 1ml n-butylchloride from 200μl aliquots of plasma, after the addition of 20μl 4% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide and 100μl stable labeled isotopic internal standards in acetonitrile. Chromatographic separations were achieved on an Aquity UPLC(®) BEH C(18) 1.7μm 2.1mm×100mm column eluted at a flow-rate of 0.250ml/min on a gradient of acetonitrile. The overall cycle time of the method was 7min, with elution times of 1.3min for DX and 3HM, 2.8min for 3MM and 2.9min for DM. The multiple reaction monitoring transitions were set at 272>215 (m/z), at 258>133 (m/z), at 258>213 (m/z) and at 244>157 (m/z) for DM, DX, 3MM and 3HM, respectively. The calibration curves were linear (r(2)≥0.995) over the range of 0.500-100nM with the lower limit of quantitation validated at 0.500nM for all compounds, which is equivalent to 136, 129, 129 and 122pg/ml for DM, DX, 3MM and 3HM, respectively. Extraction recoveries were constant, but ranged from 39% for DM to 83% for DX. The within-run and between-run precisions were within 11.6%, while the accuracy ranged from 92.7 to 110.6%. The applicability of the bioanalytical method was demonstrated and is currently implemented in a clinical trial to study DM as probe-drug for individualized tamoxifen treatment in breast cancer patients.
  The steroid hormone receptors (SHRs) are ligand-dependent intracellular transcription factors that are known to influence the development and growth of many human cancers. SHRs pass signals from a steroid/hormone to the target genes by interacting with specific response element DNA sequences and various coregulatory proteins that consists of activators and/or corepressors. Disruptions in physiological functions of SHRs leads to several types of malignancies such as breast cancer, leukemia and lymphoma, prostate cancer, ovarian cancer, and lung cancer among others. Steroids/hormones/SHRs and their coregulators have opened up a unique window for novel steroid-based targeted therapies for cancer. Thus, dysregulation of SHR signaling in cancers compared with normal tissues can be exploited to target drugs that prevent and treat human cancers. In recent years, hormonal therapy has made a major contribution to the treatment of several cancers including reduced recurrence rates and longer survival rates. Development of various steroid receptor modulators and their potential therapeutic efficacies has provided us a great opportunity to effectively manage diseases like cancer in future. In this review article, we have summarized up-to-date knowledge of the role of SHRs in the development and progression of cancers, and potential endocrine-based therapeutic approaches to tackle these diseases.
  A wide variety of new bi(hetero)aryl derivatives of the thieno[3,2-b]pyridine skeleton was obtained in high to excellent yields (65-91%) by Suzuki-Miyaura cross-coupling of the methyl 3-amino-6-bromothieno[3,2-b]pyridine-2-carboxylate, recently reported by us, with aryl or heteroaryl pinacolboranes or potassium trifluoroborates. The coupling products obtained were evaluated for their growth inhibitory effect on three human tumor cell lines, representing different tumor models, MCF-7 (breast adenocarcinoma), A375-C5 (melanoma) and NCI-H460 (non-small cell lung cancer). Some of the compounds showed an interesting activity against the tested cell lines, with GI(50) values in the μM range, and it was possible to establish some structure-activity relationships (SARs). Several compounds presented GI(50) values below 15 μM, particularly a bithiophene and an o-aniline thienopyridine derivative. The first presented selectivity for MCF-7 and NCI-H460 cell lines, with very low GI(50) values (0.7-1.0 μM), while the latter was active against the three cell lines tested in this study, also presenting very low GI(50) values (2.5-4.2 μM). The effect of these two compounds on cell cycle progression was analyzed in the NCI-H460 cell line. Results showed that both compounds interfered with the normal cell cycle distribution.
  Multidrug resistance of tumours is one of the most important factors that leads to chemotherapy failure. A multidrug-resistant breast cancer cell line, MCF-7/Taxol, was established from the drug-sensitive parent cell line MCF-7. The biological properties of MCF-7/Taxol, including its drug resistance profile and profile of paclitaxel binding proteins, were analysed and compared with the parent cell line. A number of paclitaxel binding proteins were present in MCF-7 cells but absent from MCF-7/Taxol cells, namely heat shock protein 90, actinin and dermcidin precursor. The identification of differential paclitaxel binding proteins between the multidrug-resistant MCF-7/Taxol cell line and the parent drug-sensitive cell line MCF-7 provides insight into possible mechanisms involved in resistance to these chemotherapy drugs.
  Background Accurate evaluation of human epidermal growth factor receptor type-2 (HER2) status based on core needle biopsy (CNB) specimens is mandatory for identification of patients with primary breast cancer who will benefit from primary systemic therapy with trastuzumab. The aim of the present study was to validate the application of HER2 testing with CNB specimens from primary breast cancers in terms of interobserver reproducibility and comparison with surgically resected specimens. Methods A total of 100 pairs of archival formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded CNB and surgically resected specimens of invasive breast carcinomas were cut into sections. All 100 paired sections were subjected to HER2 testing by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and 27 paired sections were subjected to that by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), the results being evaluated by three and two observers, respectively. Interobserver agreement levels in terms of judgment and the concordance of consensus scores between CNB samples and the corresponding surgically resected specimens were estimated as the percentage agreement and statistic. Results In CNB specimens, the percentage interobserver agreement of HER2 scoring by IHC was 76% (k=0.71) for 3 x 3 categories (0-1+ versus 2+ versus 3+) and 90% (k=0.80) for 2 x 2 categories (0-2+ versus 3+). These levels were close to the corresponding ones for the surgically resected specimens: 80% (k=0.77) for 3 x 3 categories and 92% (k=0.88) for 2 x 2 categories. Concordance of consensus for HER2 scores determined by IHC between CNB and the corresponding surgical specimens was 87% (k=0.77) for 3 x 3 categories, and 94% (k=0.83) for 2 x 2 categories. Among the 13 tumors showing discordance in the mean IHC scores between the CNB and surgical specimens, the results of consensus for FISH results were concordant in 11. The rate of successful FISH analysis and the FISH positivity rate in cases with a HER2 IHC score of 2+ differed among specimens processed at different institutions. Conclusion It is mandatory to study HER2 on breast cancers, and either CNB or surgical specimen can be used.
  BACKGROUND: EGF receptor variant III (EGFRvIII) is the most common variant of the EGF receptor observed in human tumors.It results from the in frame deletion of exons 2-7 and the generation of a novel glycine residue at the junction of exons 1 and 8. This novel juxtaposition of amino acids within the extra-cellular domain of the EGF receptor creates a tumor specific and immunogenic epitope. EGFRvIII expression has been seen in many tumor types including glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), breast adenocarcinoma, non-small cell lung carcinoma, ovarian adenocarcinoma and prostate cancer, but has been rarely observed in normal tissue. Because this variant is tumor specific and highly immunogenic, it can be used for both a diagnostic marker as well as a target for immunotherapy. Unfortunately many of the monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies directed against EGFRvIII have cross reactivity to wild type EGFR or other non-specific proteins. Furthermore, a monoclonal antibody to EGFRvIII is not readily available to the scientific community. RESULTS: In this study, we have developed a recombinant antibody that is specific for EGFRvIII, has little cross reactivity for the wild type receptor, and which can be easily produced.We initially designed a recombinant antibody with two anti-EGFRvIII single chain Fv's linked together and a human IgG1 Fc component.To enhance the specificity of this antibody for EGFRvIII,we mutated tyrosine H59 of the CDRH2 domain and tyrosine H105 of the CDRH3 domain to phenylalanine for both the anti-EGFRvIII sequence inserts.This mutated recombinant antibody, called RAbDMvIII, specifically detects EGFRvIII expression in EGFRvIII expressing cell lines as well as in EGFRvIII expressing GBM primary tissue by western blot, immunohistochemistry (IHC)and immunofluorescence (IF) and FACS analysis. It does not recognize wild type EGFR in any of these assays.The affinity of this antibody for EGFRvIII peptide is 1.7 x 107 M-1 as determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). CONCLUSION: This recombinant antibody thus holds great potential to be used as a research reagent and diagnostic tool in research laboratories and clinics because of its high quality, easy viability and unique versatility. This antibody is also a strong candidate to be investigated for further in vivo therapeutic studies.
  BACKGROUND: The Exercise Intensity Trial (EXcITe) is a randomized trial to compare the efficacy of supervised moderate-intensity aerobic training to moderate to high-intensity aerobic training, relative to attention control, on aerobic capacity, physiologic mechanisms, patient-reported outcomes, and biomarkers in women with operable breast cancer following the completion of definitive adjuvant therapy. METHODS: Using a single-center, randomized design, 174 postmenopausal women (58 patients / study arm) with histologically confirmed, operable breast cancer presenting to Duke University Medical Center (DUMC) will be enrolled in this trial following completion of primary therapy (including surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy). After baseline assessments, eligible participants will be randomized to one of two supervised aerobic training interventions (moderate-intensity or moderate/high-intensity aerobic training) or an attention-control group (progressive stretching). The aerobic training interventions will include 150 mins.wk-1 of supervised treadmill walking per week at an intensity of 60%-70% (moderate-intensity) or 60% to 100% (moderate to high-intensity) of the individually determined peak oxygen consumption (VO2peak) between 20-45 minutes/session for 16 weeks. The progressive stretching program will be consistent with the exercise interventions in terms of program length (16 weeks), social interaction (participants will receive one-on-one instruction), and duration (20-45 mins/session). The primary study endpoint is VO2peak, as measured by an incremental cardiopulmonary exercise test. Secondary endpoints include physiologic determinants that govern VO2peak, patient-reported outcomes, and biomarkers associated with breast cancer recurrence / mortality. All endpoints will be assessed at baseline and after the intervention (16 weeks). CONCLUSIONS: EXCITE is designed to investigate the intensity of aerobic training required to induce optimal improvements in VO2peak and other pertinent outcomes in women who have completed definitive adjuvant therapy for operable breast cancer. Overall, this trial will inform and refine exercise guidelines to optimize recovery in breast and other cancer survivors following the completion of primary cytotoxic therapy. TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT01186367.
  Introduction: Breast-conserving therapy is currently the standard of management of breast cancer cases. Radiotherapy is an integral part of it; however, it has several complications. Radiation induced burn is a common complication of radiotherapy that requires more effective lines of management rather than the classically used ones. We investigated whether the addition of pentoxifylline (PTX) alone or in combination with topical honey is effective in its management compared to the standard measures. Methods and Materials: In this prospective study, patients were randomly allocated into three groups each of 50 cases. Group A received standard burn treatment (control group). Group B received additionally 400 mg PTX twice daily. Group C received the same treatment as Group B with adding topical purified honey ointment. Patients were assessed initially and subsequently after 4 and 12 weeks, for projected coetaneous surface area (PCSA) of burn, Pain severity, limitation of movement and exudation. Results: There was a striking regression of the mean PCSAs of lesions among groups B and C at 12 weeks, with reduction rates (86±61%) and (76±58%) respectively (p<0.0001***). The addition of honey was associated with marked pain reliving effect and rescue of proper motion. Finally, honey was associated with shorter duration of treatment as 74% of group C patients completely recovered after 12 weeks, compared to only 54% and 36% of groups B and A in order. Conclusion: Combination of PTX and honey is an ideal measure for treatment of radiation-induced burn following breast conservative surgery.
  CXCL-12 and its receptor CXCR4 participate in breast cancer and melanoma cell metastasis to bone and lymphoid nodes. CD44, as a receptor for hyaluronic acid, is involved in lymphocyte recirculation, homing, adhesion and migration. But the role of CD44 in CXCL-12 induced leukemia cell migration still remains unclear. The present study showed that CXCL-12 stimulation induced the rapid internalization of CXCR4 and facilitated the formation of lamellipodia and uropod in acute leukemia cell line HL-60. CXCL-12 also induced CD44 translocation into the uropod, while CD44 remained evenly distributed on the untreated cell membranes. Results suggest that CD44 participates in CXCL-12 induced cell polarization and subsequent cell migration.
  Background: Hereditary breast cancer has a profound impact on individual family members and on their mutual communication and interactions. The way at-risk women cope with the threat of hereditary breast cancer may depend on the quality of family communication about hereditary breast cancer and on the perceived social support from family and friends.Objective: To examine the associations of family communication and social support with long-term psychological distress in a group of women at risk for hereditary breast cancer, who opted either for regular breast surveillance or prophylactic surgery.Methods: The study cohort consisted of 222 women at risk for hereditary breast cancer, who previously participated in a study on the psychological consequences of either regular breast cancer surveillance or prophylactic surgery. General and breast cancer specific distress, hereditary cancer-related family communication, perceived social support, and demographics were assessed.Results: Using structural equation modelling, we found that open communication about hereditary cancer within the family was associated with less general and breast cancer specific distress. In addition, perceived support from family and friends was indirectly associated with less general and breast cancer-specific distress through open communication within the family.Discussion: These findings indicate that family communication and perceived social support from friends and family are of paramount importance in the long-term adaptation to being at risk for hereditary breast cancer. Attention for these issues needs to be incorporated in the care of women at risk for hereditary breast cancer. Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
  Curcumin (diferuloylmethane), the yellow pigment in Indian saffron (Curcuma longa; also called turmeric, haldi, or haridara in the East and curry powder in the West), has been consumed by people for centuries as a dietary component and for a variety of proinflammatory ailments. Extensive research within the last decade in cell culture and in rodents has revealed that curcumin can sensitize tumors to different chemotherapeutic agents including doxorubicin, 5-FU, paclitaxel, vincristine, melphalan, butyrate, cisplatin, celecoxib, vinorelbine, gemcitabine, oxaliplatin, etoposide, sulfinosine, thalidomide, and bortezomib. Chemosensitization has been observed in cancers of the breast, colon, pancreas, gastric, liver, blood, lung, prostate, bladder, cervix, ovary, head and neck, and brain and in multiple myeloma, leukemia, and lymphoma. Similar studies have also revealed that this agent can sensitize a variety of tumors to gamma radiation including glioma, neuroblastoma, cervical carcinoma, epidermal carcinoma, prostate cancer, and colon cancer. How curcumin acts as a chemosensitizer and radiosensitizer has also been studied extensively. For example, it downregulates various growth regulatory pathways and specific genetic targets including genes for NF-κB, STAT3, COX2, Akt, antiapoptotic proteins, growth factor receptors, and multidrug-resistance proteins. Although it acts as a chemosensitizer and radiosensitizer for tumors in some cases, curcumin has also been shown to protect normal organs such as liver, kidney, oral mucosa, and heart from chemotherapy and radiotherapy-induced toxicity. The protective effects of curcumin appear to be mediated through its ability to induce the activation of NRF2 and induce the expression of antioxidant enzymes (e.g., hemeoxygenase-1, glutathione peroxidase, modulatory subunit of gamma-glutamyl-cysteine ligase, and NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1, increase glutathione (a product of the modulatory subunit of gamma-glutamyl-cysteine ligase), directly quench free radicals, and inhibit p300 HAT activity. These preclinical studies are expected to lead to clinical trials to prove the potential of this age-old golden spice for treating cancer patients.
  We considered flavonoids and proanthocyanidins in a network of multicentric Italian case-control studies including about 10,000 incident, histologically confirmed cases of selected cancers and over 16,000 controls. Odds ratios (ORs) for the highest vs. the lowest quintile of 6 classes of flavonoids and proanthocyanidins were estimated by multiple logistic regression models. Total flavonoids, flavanones, and flavonols were inversely related to oral and laryngeal cancers (ORs, respectively 0.56 and 0.60 for total flavonoids; 0.51 and 0.60 for flavanones; and 0.62 and 0.32 for flavonols). Flavanols were also inversely related to laryngeal cancer (OR = 0.64), whereas flavanones were inversely related to esophageal cancer (OR = 0.38). A reduced risk of colorectal cancer was found for high intake of anthocyanidins (OR = 0.67), flavonols (OR = 0.64), flavones (OR = 0.78), and isoflavones (OR = 0.76). Inverse relations with breast cancer were found for flavones (OR = 0.81) and flavonols (OR = 0.80). Flavonols (OR = 0.63) and isoflavones (OR = 0.51) were inversely associated to ovarian cancer, whereas flavonols (OR = 0.69) and flavones (OR = 0.68) were inversely associated to renal cancer. No association between flavonoids and prostate cancer emerged. We found inverse associations between proanthocyanidins and colorectal cancer. These associations appeared stronger for proanthocyanidins with a higher degree of polymerization (OR = 0.69 for ≥ 10 mers).
  BACKGROUND: The hook-wire technique is used to guide surgical excision of nonpalpable breast lesions. Recently, isotope has been used to guide the excision, and when sentinel node biopsy is performed during the same operation, the procedure is termed Sentinel Node and Occult Lesion Localization (SNOLL). We evaluated the use of this procedure for nonpalpable cancers in Chinese women. METHODS: Seventy-four patients underwent SNOLL before breast-conserving surgery. Intratumoral injection of sulfur colloid and lymphoscintigraphy (LSG) were performed. A gamma probe was used for resection planning and localization of the sentinel node (SN). Blue dye mapping was used in patients with negative LSG. Complete excision was defined as a tumor-free margin greater than 1 mm. RESULTS: The primary breast lesion was successfully removed in 73 patients (99%). Complete excision was achieved in 61 patients (82%). Drainage to axilla was detected by LSG in 53 patients (72%). The gamma probe was more sensitive than LSG and had an 82% SN identification rate. Patients with a positive LSG had a higher chance of SN localization by gamma probe than patients with a negative LSG (100% vs. 38%, p < 0.001). In patients with a negative LSG, supplementary blue dye mapping increased the SN localization rate from 38 to 90%. The SN identification rate was 97% in the whole series. CONCLUSION: Isotope-guided surgery was reliable, with a 99% localization rate for nonpalpable breast lesions and an 82% SN localization rate. The success rate of SN identification could be improved to 97% with the addition of blue dye mapping for patients with negative drainage on lymphoscintigraphy.
  BACKGROUND: To improve the quality of breast cancer screening by ultrasonography, both effective training and evaluation of the performance of the examiners of breast ultrasound are essential. METHODS: The Educational Committee of the Japan Association of Breast and Thyroid Sonology, an NPO, has established 2-day training programs on breast ultrasonography with tests at the end of the programs. The tests are performed using images to evaluate the ability of observers to detect and evaluate lesions on ultrasound. Ability to detect lesions was examined by using videos, and ability to evaluate lesions was examined by using still images. The results of tests taken by 422 physicians and 415 technologists were analyzed. RESULTS: In a comparison between physicians and technologists, the video specificity, the still image sensitivity, and the percentage of category agreement did not show any significant differences. The video sensitivity, the still image specificity, and the percentage of disease name agreement were significantly higher in technologists. Observers who had experienced <100 cases showed significantly poorer results in all subjects except for the video specificity in physicians and the still image specificity in technologists. CONCLUSIONS: Ultrasound technologists perform as well as physicians in recognizing and interpreting cancers on breast ultrasound, which supports their role in performing the initial screening examination.
  This article is part of a larger study on the role of spirituality in coping with breast cancer among Malaysian Muslim women. The study seeks to reveal the meaning of the experience through the stories of three Muslim women surviving advanced breast cancer, to better understand the deep meanings that inform their experiences with spirituality and transformation as they cope with the challenges of breast cancer. Data were gathered using in-depth interview. Qualitative methods were used in identifying two themes-illness as an awakening and hope and freedom comes from surrendering to God. The themes were discussed in the context of two broad areas: (1) what are the new meanings these women discovered in their experiences with cancer; and (2) how did the new meanings change their lives? The study suggests that cancer survivors' experiences with cancer and their learning processes must be understood within the appropriate cultural context. This is especially so for spirituality. The common emphasis of spirituality on relationship with God, self and others, may significantly influence how people learn to live with cancer.
  Background:The recent introduction of a dynamic nuclear polarisation technique has permitted noninvasive imaging of tumour cell metabolism in vivo following intravenous administration of (13)C-labelled cell substrates.Methods:Changes in hyperpolarised [1-(13)C]pyruvate and [1,4-(13)C(2)]fumarate metabolism were evaluated in both MDA-MB-231 cells and in implanted MDA-MB-231 tumours following doxorubicin treatment.Results:Treatment of MDA-MB-231 cells resulted in the induction of apoptosis, which was accompanied by a decrease in hyperpolarised (13)C label flux between [1-(13)C]pyruvate and lactate, which was correlated with a decrease in the cellular NAD(H) coenzyme pool. There was also an increase in the rate of fumarate conversion to malate, which accompanied the onset of cellular necrosis. In vivo, the decrease in (13)C label exchange between pyruvate and lactate and the increased flux between fumarate and malate, following drug treatment, were shown to occur in the absence of any detectable change in tumour size.Conclusion:We show here that the early responses of a human breast adenocarcinoma tumour model to drug treatment can be followed by administration of both hyperpolarised [1-(13)C]pyruvate and [1,4-(13)C(2)]fumarate. These techniques could be used, therefore, in the clinic to detect the early responses of breast tumours to treatment.British Journal of Cancer advance online publication, 5 October 2010; doi:10.1038/sj.bjc.6605945 www.bjcancer.com.
  AIM: A mainstay of lymphedema management involves the use of compression therapy. Compression therapy application is variable at different levels of disease severity. Evidence is scant to direct clinicians in best practice regarding compression therapy use. Further, compression clinical trials are fragmented and poorly extrapolable to the greater population. An ideal construct for conducting clinical trials in regards to compression therapy will promote parallel global initiatives based on a standard research agenda. The purpose of this article is to review current evidence in practice regarding compression therapy for BCRL management and based on this evidence, offer an expert consensus recommendation for a research agenda and prescriptive trials. Recommendations herein focus solely on compression interventions. METHODS: This document represents the proceedings of a session organized by the International Compression Club (ICC) in June 2009 in Ponzano (Veneto, Italy). The purpose of the meeting was to enable a group of experts to discuss the existing evidence for compression treatment in breast cancer related lymphedema (BCRL) concentrating on areas where randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are lacking. RESULTS: The current body of research suggests efficacy of compression interventions in the treatment and management of lymphedema. However, studies to date have failed to adequately address various forms of compression therapy and their optimal application in BCRL. We offer recommendations for standardized compression research trials for prophylaxis of arm lymphedema and for the management of chronic BCRL. Suggestions are also made regarding; inclusion and exclusion criteria, measurement methodology and additional variables of interest for researchers to capture. CONCLUSION: This document should inform future research trials in compression therapy and serve as a guide to clinical researchers, industry researchers and lymphologists regarding the strengths, weaknesses and shortcomings of the current literature. By providing this construct for research trials, the authors aim to support evidence-based therapy interventions, promote a cohesive, standardized and informative body of literature to enhance clinical outcomes, improve the quality of future research trials, inform industry innovation and guide policy related to BCRL.
  AIM: The aim of this paper was to examine the reliability and validity of a new measurement device that counters the disadvantages of the traditional method of arm circumference measurements. METHODS: We measured the arm on the non-operated side of breast cancer patients. Sixty-four patients were measured twice by the same assessor and 48 patients were measured twice by two different assessors. The arm circumferences were measured at the olecranon and each 4 cm proximal and distal of the olecranon. The measurements were performed with a self-developed device consisting of a stainless steel bar on which a tapeline was fixed at every 4 cm distance. The arm volume was calculated from the circumference measurements with the frustrum formula and was also measured directly with the water displacement method. RESULTS: For the circumference measurements, intrarater and interrater ICCs ranged between 0.942 and 0.998. ICCs for the calculated arm volume were also very high. No systematic changes between the first to the second assessment could be found. The standard error of measurement for the circumference measurements as well as for the calculated arm volume was low (between 0.8% and 2.0%). An increase of 1.0 cm or more of the arm circumference at any measurement side and of 55 ml or more of the calculated arm volume was clinically significant. CONCLUSION: Arm circumferences and also the calculated arm volume can be measured quickly and accurately with a simple and inexpensive device.
  OBJECTIVE:: The aim of this study was to elucidate the clinicopathological features and prognosis of mucinous cystic neoplasms (MCNs). MATERIALS AND METHODS:: We performed a multi-institutional, retrospective study on a collected series of patients with MCN pathologically defined by ovarian-type stroma. Clinicopathological features and prognosis were investigated. RESULT:: Mucinous cystic neoplasm was confirmed in 156 cases, including 129 adenomas (82.7%) and 21 noninvasive (13.4%) and 6 invasive carcinomas (3.9%). Patients with MCN were exclusively women (98.1%) with the mean age of 48.1 years. All but 1 MCN were in the pancreatic body/tail region with a mean size of 65.3 mm. Communication between the cyst and the pancreatic duct was found in 18.1%. The 3-, 5-, and 10-year survival rates were 97.6%, 96.6%, and 96.6%, respectively. A significant difference in the survival rates was observed between adenomas and carcinomas and between minimally invasive carcinomas and invasive carcinomas. Cyst diameter and presence of mural nodule were predictive of malignant MCN. CONCLUSIONS:: Mucinous cystic neoplasm is a rare but distinctive pancreatic cystic neoplasm with a favorable overall prognosis. All MCNs should be resected to prevent malignant changes but can be observed for an appropriate time when the lesion is small without the presence of mural nodules.
  A 74-year-old woman with impaired glucose tolerance exhibited virilization. An examination of various hormone levels showed normal pituitary hormone and adrenal hormone levels. However, the patient's blood testosterone level was remarkably high and was suspected of having caused the virilization. An abdominal computed tomography revealed a multilocular cystoma in the left ovary with the features of a mature cystic teratoma. In addition, a chest computed tomography revealed the presence of a mass in the left breast that was subsequently diagnosed as breast cancer based on the results of a biopsy. After the simultaneous surgical resection of the ovarian and breast tumors, her blood testosterone level decreased. The mature cystic teratoma containing a Brenner tumor was considered to be responsible for the high testosterone level because of the presence of androgenic enzymes. This case is extremely rare, but the case was accurately diagnosed through a comprehensive analysis.
  OBJECTIVES: Despite the fact that breast conservation therapy has been established as an effective treatment, a number of issues and controversies currently surround the application of this treatment for patients with stage T1 and T2 breast cancer. METHODS: Records of patients with histologically confirmed stage T1 (n = 1172) and stage T2 (n = 349) breast cancer, treated with wide local tumor excision and whole breast irradiation between January 1970 and December 2000, were prospectively registered on our database. Median follow-up was 6.6 years. Numerous publications addressing issues to be reviewed were collected, and data and prevailing controversies are discussed. RESULTS: The 10-year actuarial incidence of ipsilateral breast relapse was 7% for T1 and 11% for T2 tumors. Results with breast conservation therapy were equivalent in white or black women with T1 or T2 tumors. In patients younger than 40 years, incidence of failures was 10% for T1 (in contrast to 4% for other age groups) and 15% for T2 lesions (in contrast to 6% in other groups). The incidence of ipsilateral recurrences in women younger than 40 years was, for T1 tumors, 9% with negative surgical margins and 12% with close or positive margins and for T2 tumors 12% and 22%, respectively (difference not statistically significant). CONCLUSIONS: Use of breast-conserving surgical therapy should be optimized to enhance therapeutic outcome. Many developments in the oncological field and refinements in treatment planning and delivery of radiation therapy provide unique opportunities for the radiation oncologist to continue to play an integral role in the management of patients with breast cancer.
  Oncogene activation promotes an intrinsic inflammatory pathway that is crucial for cancer development. Here, we have investigated the actual effect of the inflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor (TNF) on the natural history of spontaneous mammary cancer in the HER2/neuT (NeuT) transgenic mouse model. Bone marrow transplantation from TNF knockout mice into NeuT recipients significantly impaired tumor growth, indicating that the source of TNF fostering tumor development was of bone marrow origin. We show that the absence of leukocyte-derived TNF disarranged the tumor vasculature, which lacked pericyte coverage and structural integrity, leading to diffuse vascular hemorrhage and stromal necrosis. In addition, tumor-associated Tie2-expressing monocytes were reduced and cytokine expression skewed from Th2 to Th1 type. Treatment of NeuT mice with anti-TNF antibody partially phenocopied the antitumor effect of TNF-deficient bone marrow cell transplantation, providing a strong preclinical background and rationale for the introduction of TNF antagonists in the treatment of human breast cancer, including basal-like samples for which consolidated targeted therapies do not exist. Cancer Res; 70(20); 7764-75. ©2010 AACR.
  Detection of circulating tumor cells (CTC) is advancing as an effective predictor of patient outcome and therapeutic response. Unfortunately, our knowledge of CTC biology remains limited, and the impact of drug treatments on CTC metastatic potential is currently unclear. Improved CTC imaging in vivo and analysis of free-floating tumor cells now show that cytoskeletal regulation in CTCs contrasts starkly with tumor cells attached to extracellular matrix. In this review, we examine how persistent microtubule stabilization promotes the formation of microtentacles on the surface of detached breast tumor cells and enhances metastatic potential. Cancer Res; 70(20); 7737-41. ©2010 AACR.

  PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to examine the level of symptoms, psychological distress, and supportive care needs and factors related to five unmet need domains in lung cancer patients. METHODS: A cross-sectional study of 152 lung cancer patients at a medical center in Taiwan assessed their symptoms, psychological distress, and unmet supportive needs in five major care domains. Logistic regression was applied to examine the related factors of unmet supportive care needs. RESULTS: In general, patients had mild-to-moderate levels of symptoms and high prevalence of psychological distress. Regardless of their treatment status, they reported high levels of supportive care needs. The top three need domains were: (1) health system and information, (2) psychological, and (3) patient care and support. Levels of symptoms, anxiety, and depression were the most significant factors in unmet supportive care needs. CONCLUSION: The effect of symptoms and psychological distress on unmet supportive care needs is substantial. Therefore, a systematic assessment of patients' distress and care needs is important for clinical lung cancer care. Further intervention consisting of symptom management, continuing counseling, and preparation for transition from active treatment to the follow-up stages are essential in improving quality of care.
 Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are a small subset of cancer cells capable of self-renewal and tumor maintenance. Eradicating cancer stem cells, the root of tumor origin and recurrence, has emerged as one promising approach to improve lung cancer survival. Cancer stem cells are reported to reside in the side population (SP) of cultured lung cancer cells. We report here the coexistence of a distinct population of non-SP (NSP) cells that have equivalent self-renewal capacity compared to SP cells in a lung tumor sphere assay. Compared with the corresponding cells in monolayer cultures, lung tumor spheres, formed from human non-small cell lung carcinoma cell lines A549 or H1299, showed marked morphologic differences and increased expression of the stem cell markers CD133 and OCT3/4. Lung tumor spheres also exhibited increased tumorigenic potential as only 10,000 lung tumor sphere cells were required to produce xenografts tumors in nude mice, whereas the same number of monolayer cells failed to induce tumors. We also demonstrate that lung tumor spheres showed decreased 26S proteasome activity compared to monolayer. By using the ZsGreen-cODC (C-terminal sequence that directs degradation of Ornithine Decarboxylase) reporter assay in NSCLC cell lines, only less than 1% monolayer cultures were ZsGreen positive indicating low 26S proteasome, whereas lung tumor sphere showed increased numbers of ZsGreen-positive cells, suggesting the enrichment of CSCs in sphere cultures.
 Breast metastases from an extramammary primary tumor are very rare and the prognosis for such patients is generally poor. We report here on a case of a 42-year-old female with metastasis of non-small cell lung cancer to the breast, and she is now being followed up on an outpatient basis. In 2004, she presented with a solitary pulmonary nodule in the left lung, and this lesion had been noted to have gradually increased in size over time. The final pathological diagnosis was adenocarcinoma, and the diagnosis was made by performing percutaneous needle aspiration and lobectomy of the left upper lobe. Adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy were given. Unfortunately, a nodule in the left breast was noted three years later, and metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer to the breast was diagnosed by excisional biopsy. Making the correct diagnosis to distinguish a primary breast carcinoma from a metastatic one is important, because the therapeutic plan and outcome for these two types of cancer are quite different.
 Stage I lung cancer has a high cure rate with surgery, although many patients are not surgical candidates due to comorbid conditions. Historically, non-operative treatment has been disappointing. New and promising ablative therapies offer a curative option.
 Computed tomography screening for early diagnosis of lung cancer is one of the more potentially useful strategies, aside from smoking cessation programmes, for reducing mortality and improving the current poor survival from this disease. The long-term success of lung cancer screening will be dependent upon identifying populations at sufficient risk in order to maximise the benefit-to-harm ratio of the intervention. Risk prediction models could potentially play a major role in the selection of high-risk individuals who would benefit most from screening intervention programmes for the early detection of lung cancer. Improvements of developed lung cancer risk prediction models (through incorporation of objective clinical factors and genetic and molecular biomarkers for precise and accurate estimation of risks), demonstration of their clinical usefulness in decision making, and their use in future screening programmes are the focus of current research.
 The importance of palliative care and implementing end-of-life tools nationally is well recognized, yet inequalities in care between patients with malignant and non-malignant disease are well documented. There is little evidence that open discussions regarding end-of-life decision-making are taking place routinely with patients who have non-malignant disease, so it seemed appropriate to investigate health professionals' perspectives. Aim: This study aimed to explore and provide insight into respiratory health professionals' experiences of their discussions with patients with life-limiting chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Method: A qualitative phenomenology approach was used. In-depth, face-to-face interviews were conducted with a purposive sample of three respiratory nurses, two lung cancer nurse specialists, and two respiratory physicians. Findings: The seven in-depth interviews were thematically analysed so that the data could be categorized. The themes that emerged were: choosing the right time; the skill of picking up and receiving cues; deciding when, what and how to tell; boundaries to discussion; and working with emotions. Conclusions: The main findings highlighted the difference in approach in discussions between patients with cancer and those with non-malignant disease. The emotional phenomena that emerged could have significant implications for clinical practice. The findings suggest that the emotional dimension plays a crucial part in engaging with patients and involving them in end-of-life care planning.
 The infusion of natural killer (NK) cells is a promising therapy for patients with advanced malignancies. Clinical expanded NK-cell products were compared with freshly isolated NK cells. Autologous peripheral blood mononuclear cells were collected by apheresis from 8 patients. NK cells were isolated by anti-CD3-negative selection followed by anti-CD56-positive selection. They were then expanded by co-culture with interleukin-2 and an irradiated Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-transformed lymphoblastoid cell line (EBV-TM-LCL) to produce 14 NK-cell products. Molecular changes in the 14 NK-cell products were characterized using gene and microRNA expression microarrays. EBV-TM-LCL feeder cells from 3 lots were also analyzed as they were expanded for over 90 days and each lot was used for multiple NK-cell expansions. The gene expression profiles among the 3 EBV-TM-LCL lots used showed no differences and were not affected by their time in culture. Freshly isolated and expanded NK cells had distinct gene and microRNA expression profiles. Compared with fresh NK cells, expanded NK cells overexpressed 1098 genes and 28 human microRNAs. Genes in the crosstalk between dendritic and NK cells and metabolic pathways were up-regulated in expanded NK cells, whereas genes in a number of immune function pathways were down-regulated. Among all the most up-regulated genes were the NK cell-activating receptor natural cytotoxicity triggering receptor 3, myxovirus restistance 1, lymphotoxin β, and BCL2-associated X protein. Although some expanded NK-cell product variability was observed, perhaps related to patient factors, further studies on larger numbers of products will be needed to determine the impact of these differences on clinical outcomes.
 The patient was a 75-year-old woman who had undergone an operation for T4, N0: stage IV a gall bladder cancer in May of 2003. UFT was given as adjuvant chemotherapy. Then S-1 and gemcitabine(GEM)were given because of the recurrence of peritoneal dissemination in June 2006. Though a partial response was maintained, it was judged as progressive disease in July 2007. The peritoneal tumor was solitary, and an operation was performed. S-1 and GEM were given again in January 2008 because of multiple lung metastases. Long-term survival was confirmed until she died of peritonitis carcinomatosa in August 2009. To our knowledge, no case of a long survivor with S-1 and GEM for recurrence after a gall bladder cancer operation has been reported in the literature. Thus, future clinical trials and the accumulation of further cases are warranted.
 Background: EGFR-TKI yields a long survival period in cases of non-small cell lung cancer(NSCLC), especially those with EGFR gene mutations, but the effect is limited. The later treatment strategy is still a large problem. Efficacy by re-treatment with EGFR-TKI is sometimes reported, but its clinical significance is not clear. Methods: We reviewed retrospectively 22 cases (gefitinib 11 cases and erlotinib 11 cases)of NSCLC re-treated with EGFR-TKI in our hospital from August 2004 to August 2009. Results: After re-treatment with gefitinib, four cases showed disease control. Efficacy of erlotinib was recognized in the cases in which disease control was obtained by initial treatment with gefitinib. The disease control rate was 36%(4/11)in the gefitinib group and 45%(5/11)in the erlotinib group. Median survival time was 212 days and 292 days from re-treatment with EGFR-TKI, respectively. Conclusion: Re-administration of EGFR-TKI was effective, and therefore is considered one of the treatment options for patients who once respond to gefitinib, until new anti-cancer drugs are available.
 Background: The standard therapy for young patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer(NSCLC)is platinum doublet therapy, whereas that for elderly patients with NSCLC is single-agent therapy. However, there is limited information about the platinum-based treatment for elderly patients. Purpose: The aim of this study is to examine the efficacy and safety of platinum-doublet therapy for elderly patients, retrospectively. Methods: There were 76 patients 75 years old or more with advanced NSCLC for whom chemotherapy was performed between June, 2008 and January, 2005. Among them, 65 patients except for 11 who underwent first-line gefitinib therapy were retrospectively reviewed. Results: Median age: 77 years old (range 75-83 years old), gender: male/female; 51/14, stage: III B/ IV ; 15/50, pathology: adeno/squamous/other; 41/13/11, PS: 0/1/2; 14/44/7 patients. Fifty-three patients received single-agent(S), whereas 12 patients received platinum-doublet (D). Even in the analysis of patients with PS 0-1, similar results were obtained. Progression-free survival(PFS)was 107 versus 85 days, and overall survival(OS)was 270 versus 262 days between S and D, in patients with PS 0-1. In addition, we did not recognize a large difference in toxicity between S and D. Conclusion: In this examination, we could not show a large difference in efficacy and toxicity between platinum-doublet therapy and single-agent therapy. Further study would be needed to confirm our results.
 Palliative therapy using radioactive strontium(89Sr)was performed on 60 patients suffering from cancer. Seventy-one percent of the patients had stopped or reduced their opiates and/or analgesics. Pain relief continued for up to three months. Patients with breast and prostatic cancer showed the best pain reduction. However, pain reduction was limited for lung cancer patients. Repeated usage of / 89Sr with/without opiate and analgesics served to maintain the reduced level of pain. Side effects of repeated usage of 89Sr were decrease of hemoglobin, WBC, and platelets. The decreased level was limited within Level 1. The indication of 89Sr therapy is important. DIC cases and renal failure cases will have increased side effect risk. Image diagnosis is also important. A bone scan is a minimum requirement. Poor accumulation of 99mTc-MDP cases are not indication. Rapidly progressive disease cases, radiculopathy cases, and soft tissue invasion cases should not be given 89Sr therapy. At present, the uses of 89Sr are limited to end-stage patients. The use of 89Sr should change from end stage to early stage in combination with chemotherapy.
 The aim of this study was to examine the role of cognitive appraisal in predicting psychosocial adjustment during the postradiation treatment transition. A predictive correlational design was used in a convenience sample of 80 patients with breast, lung, and prostate cancer who were receiving radiation therapy. Two weeks prior to completion of treatment, participants completed instruments to measure symptom distress, uncertainty, cognitive appraisal, social support, and self-efficacy for coping. The Psychosocial Adjustment to Illness Scale was administered 1 month after therapy. Adjustment was significantly correlated with all independent variables, age, and comorbidity. Young age and high amounts of threat appraisal, harm/loss appraisal, uncertainty, and symptom distress were significantly associated with poor adjustment. The model predicted 52% of the variability in adjustment. Cognitive appraisal was not a significant explanatory variable for adjustment when controlling for uncertainty, cancer stage, age, and symptom distress. Symptom distress was the only significant predictor of adjustment.
 PURPOSE: Esophageal cancer is one of the most aggressive and deadly forms of cancer; highlighting the need to identify biomarkers for prognostic classification. Our recent studies have identified inflammatory gene and microRNA signatures as prognostic biomarkers of hepatocellular, lung, and colorectal adenocarcinoma. Here, we examine the relationship between expression of inflammatory genes and miRNA in esophageal adenocarcinoma patients. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We measured the expression of 23 inflammation-associated genes in tumors and adjacent normal tissues from 93 patients (58 Barrett's and 35 Sporadic adenocarcinomas) by qRT-PCR. These data were used to build an inflammatory risk model, based on multivariate Cox regression, to predict survival in a training cohort (n=47). We then determined if this model could predict survival in a cohort of 46 patients. Expression data for miRNA-375 was available for these patients and was combined with inflammatory gene expression.RESULTS: IFNγ, IL-1α, IL-8, IL-21, IL-23, and PRG expression in tumor and nontumor samples were each associated with poor prognosis based on Cox regression ([Z-score]>1.5) and therefore, were used to generate an inflammatory risk score (IRS). Patients with a high IRS had poor prognosis compared to those with a low IRS in the training (P=0.002) and test (P=0.012) cohorts. This association was stronger in the group with Barrett's history. When combining with miRNA-375, the combined IRS/miR signature was an improved prognostic classifier than either one alone. CONCLUSIONS: Transcriptional profiling of inflammation-associated genes and miRNA expression in resected esophageal Barrett's associated adenocarcinoma tissues may have clinical utility as predictors of prognosis.
 Purpose Our goal was to describe the clinical, histological, and epidemiological characteristics of lung cancer diagnoses in people ≥70 years of age. Materials and methods Information on patients diagnosed with lung cancer from January 2006 to February 2008 was prospectively collected from the outpatient oncology department at a regional hospital. A total of 83 patients (97.6% men; mean age 77 years) were studied. There was a higher ratio of men to women than that reported in younger populations. Mean age was higher than that reported for randomized studies: 65.1% were ≥75 years old. Patients >80 years constituted 28.9% of the study population. Most patients (96.4%) had a history of smoking; they were predominantly former smokers (72.5% vs. 27.5%). Results The most common histological types were squamous cell (61.3%) and small cell (14.5%) carcinoma. Metastasis was present in 36.1% of patients. Stage was significantly associated with survival (logrank p < 0.001). There was no association between age and survival. Squamous cell lung cancer was associated with a better survival (p = 0.003). Conclusions Elderly lung cancer patients who attended clinical practice were older than those included in prospective studies. The predominance of men and squamous cell carcinoma is associated with a smoking history. The epidemiological and histological patterns of younger patients have changed, possibly in relation to changes in smoking habits. The translation of these changes to elderly patients will be evidenced in the future. Only prospective epidemiologic studies will determine whether smoking habits are changing epidemiology in elderly lung cancer patients.
 A series of novel 2-(5-(hydroxymethyl)-3-phenyl-1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-1-phenylethanol derivatives (4) was synthesized from ethyl 1-(2-oxo-2-phenylethyl)-3-phenyl-1H-pyrazole-5-carboxylate derivatives (3) and characterized by means of IR, (1)H NMR, HRMS and X-ray crystal diffraction. Structures of 4a, 4d, 4e and 4f were also determined by (13)C NMR. Isomeric intermediates, 3a and 5a, were unambiguously confirmed by X-ray crystal structure analysis and successfully differentiated with (1)H NMR chemical shifts of methylene bonded to pyrazole ring. Preliminary biological evaluation showed that compounds 4d and 4e could suppress A549 lung cancer cell growth through cell cycle arrest and autophagy.
 This study examined quality of life (QOL) and illness perceptions in Dutch and Japanese patients with non-small-cell lung cancer, thereby extending the body of knowledge on cultural differences and psychosocial aspects of this illness. 24 Dutch and 22 Japanese patients with non-small-cell lung cancer filled out questionnaires on three occasions: immediately before chemotherapy, 1 week later, and 8 weeks after the initial chemotherapy. The European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire (EORTC QLQ-C30) assessed QOL, and the Brief Illness Perception Questionnaire (B-IPQ) illness perceptions. Scores on several QOL measures indicated (a) major impact of first chemotherapy sessions, and (b) some tendency to returning to baseline measures at 8 weeks. Differences between Japanese and Dutch samples were found on five EORTC QLQ-C30 dimensions: global health status, emotional functioning, social functioning, constipation, and financial difficulties, with the Dutch patients reporting more favorable scores. Regarding illness perceptions, Japanese patients had higher means on perceived treatment control and personal control, expressing a higher sense of belief in the success of medical treatment than Dutch patients. In both Japanese and Dutch patients, impact of chemotherapy on QOL was evident. Some differences in illness perceptions and QOL between the two samples were observed, with implications for integral medical management. Both samples reported illness perceptions that reflect the major consequences of non-small-cell lung cancer. Incorporating symptom reports, illness perceptions, and QOL into medical management may have positive consequences for patients with non-small-cell lung cancer.
 Signaling by ErbB receptors requires the activation of their cytoplasmic kinase domains, which is initiated by ligand binding to the receptor ectodomains. Cytoplasmic factors contributing to the activation are unknown. Here we identify members of the cytohesin protein family as such factors. Cytohesin inhibition decreased ErbB receptor autophosphorylation and signaling, whereas cytohesin overexpression stimulated receptor activation. Monitoring epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) conformation by anisotropy microscopy together with cell-free reconstitution of cytohesin-dependent receptor autophosphorylation indicate that cytohesins facilitate conformational rearrangements in the intracellular domains of dimerized receptors. Consistent with cytohesins playing a prominent role in ErbB receptor signaling, we found that cytohesin overexpression correlated with EGF signaling pathway activation in human lung adenocarcinomas. Chemical inhibition of cytohesins resulted in reduced proliferation of EGFR-dependent lung cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. Our results establish cytohesins as cytoplasmic conformational activators of ErbB receptors that are of pathophysiological relevance.
 Patients with pulmonary small cell carcinoma are well known to have a poor prognosis. However, predictors of prognosis and treatment outcome have not been reported for this type of cancer. We examined whether excision repair cross-complementation group 1 (ERCC1), phosphorylated Akt (p-Akt), phosphorylated mammalian target of rapamycin (p-mTOR), and the uridine diphosphate glucuronosyl transferase1A1 (UGT1A1) genetic polymorphism were useful indicators of prognosis in cases of small cell carcinoma of the lung. We investigated 45 patients with advanced small cell lung cancer who received chemotherapy with irinotecan combined with cisplatin or carboplatin. Staining results showed that 12 of 45 cases (27%) were positive for p-Akt, while 18 (40%) were positive for p-mTOR and 16 (36%) were positive for ERCC1. As for UGT1A1, more than one polymorphism was found in 30 cases (67%). There was a significant relationship observed between the expressions of p-Akt and p-mTOR (P= 0.0006). Univariate analysis indicated a significantly better survival rate for patients positive for p-Akt or p-mTOR, while multivariate analysis using a Cox test showed p-Akt to be the strongest prognostic factor. Our results indicate that p-Akt is a reliable prognostic factor in patients with small cell carcinoma of the lung.
 Indinavir, a human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) protease inhibitor, inhibits the growth of tumor cells in vivo but does not show any cytotoxicity against cancer cells in vitro. To optimize the anticancer activity of indinavir, two novel analogs, CH05-0 and CH05-10, were synthesized. CH05-10 was much more cytotoxic than indinavir and had similar cytotoxicity to nelfinavir, the one with the best anticancer activities among all HIV protease inhibitors examined. For 14 cell lines representing 10 different types of human malignancies, the 50% inhibitory concentration (IC(50) ) values of CH05-10 are in the range of 4.64-38.87 μM. Further detailed studies using the lung cancer cell line A549 as the model system showed that the effect of CH05-10 on the A549 cell line is both time- and dose-dependent. The CH05-10 treatment not only induced cell cycle arrest at G(1) and caused caspase-dependent apoptosis, but also resulted in caspase-independent death via the induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress and unfolded protein response. These findings demonstrate that CH05-10, a novel indinavir analog, is a potent anticancer agent with pleiotropic effects. (Cancer Sci, doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01724.x, 2010).
 Histone deacetylase inhibitors such as butyrate are known to exhibit anti-cancer activities in a wide range of cancer including melanoma. In spite of these potencies, butyrate is not practically used for cancer treatment due to its rapid metabolism and very short plasma half-life. Tributyrin, a triglyceride analog of butyrate, can act as a pro-drug of butyrate after being cleaved by intracellular enzymes. The present study sought to investigate a possibility to develop tributyrin emulsion as a potent anti-cancer agent against melanoma. Mixture of Tween80 and 1, 2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine as a surfactant to disperse tributyrin produced homogeneous emulsions with nanometer sizes, even without a harsh homogenization procedure. Tributyrin emulsion was more potent than butyrate in inhibiting the growth of B16-F10 melanoma cells. Accumulation of cells at sub G<inf>0</inf>/G<inf>1</inf> phase and the DNA fragmentation induced by tributyrin emulsion treatment revealed that tributyrin emulsion inhibited the growth of B16-F10 cells by inducing apoptosis. Treatment with tributyrin emulsion suppressed the colony formation of melanoma cells in a dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, after intraperitoneal administration into mice, tributyrin emulsion inhibited the formation of tumor colonies in the lung following intravenous injection of melanoma cells. Taken together, our data suggests that tributyrin emulsion may be developed as a potent anti-cancer agent against melanoma.
 Ridaforolimus (AP23573; MK 8669) is an analog of sirolimus and a small molecule inhibitor of the mammalian target of rapamycin for the treatment of cancer. Both intravenous and oral formulations of the compound are being tested in clinical trials for the treatment of soft-tissue and bone sarcomas. It is in phase III development for sarcoma in the EU and US, and phase II for breast cancer, endometrial cancer, non-small cell lung cancer, and prostate cancer in the US and other markets in the world. This review discusses the key development milestones and therapeutic trials of this drug.
 In this study we report a novel use for the iTRAQ® reagent combined with a peptide mass inclusion list to enhance the signal of low-abundance proteins during analysis by mass spectrometry. C-tagged-SH-EGFR was retrovirally-transduced into two mutant lung cancer cell lines (HCC827 and PC9) and the core protein complexes enriched by tandem affinity purification. Tryptically-digested peptides were derivatised with iTRAQ® and analysed by higher-energy collision-induced dissociation mass spectrometry. The data revealed that UBS3B is a member of the EGFR core complex in the HCC827 cell line, that was not apparent by standard, unbiased one-dimensional shotgun analysis and collision-induced dissociation. The expression level of UBS3B, however, was 6 to 10 times lower than that observed in the PC9 cell line. Thus, using iTRAQ® in this fashion allows the identification of low-abundance interactors when combined with samples where the same protein has a higher abundance. Ultimately, this approach may uncover proteins that were previously unknown or only suspected as members of core protein complexes.
 Accumulating evidence demonstrates that PKCi is an oncogene and prognostic marker that is frequently targeted for genetic alteration in many major forms of human cancer. Functional data demonstrate that PKCi is required for the transformed phenotype of NSCLC, pancreatic, ovarian, prostate, colon and brain cancer cells. Future studies will be required to determine whether PKCi is also an oncogene in the many other cancer types that also overexpress PKCi. Studies of PKCi using genetically defined models of tumorigenesis have revealed a critical role for PKCi in multiple stages of tumorigenesis, including tumor initiation, progression and metastasis. Recent studies in a genetic model of lung adenocarcinoma suggest a role for PKCi in transformation of lung cancer stem cells. These studies have important implications for the therapeutic use of aurothiomalate (ATM), a highly selective PKCi signaling inhibitor currently undergoing clinical evaluation. Significant progress has been made in determining the molecular mechanisms by which PKCi drives the transformed phenotype, particularly the central role played by the oncogenic PKCi-Par6 complex in transformed growth and invasion, and of several PKCi-dependent survival pathways in chemo-resistance. Future studies will be required to determine the composition and dynamics of the PKCi-Par6 complex, and the mechanisms by which oncogenic signaling through this complex is regulated. Likewise, a better understanding of the critical downstream effectors of PKCi in various human tumor types holds promise for identifying novel prognostic and surrogate markers of oncogenic PKCi activity that may be clinically useful in ongoing clinical trials of ATM. J. Cell. Physiol. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
 BACKGROUND:: The transcription factor TCF21 is involved in mesenchymal-to-epithelial differentiation and was shown to be aberrantly hypermethylated in lung and head and neck cancers. Because of its reported high frequency of hypermethylation in lung cancer, further characterization of the stages and types of nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) that are hypermethylated and the frequency of hypermethylation and associated "second hits" were assessed. METHODS:: TCF21 promoter hypermethylation in 105 NSCLC including various stages and histologies in smokers and nonsmokers was determined. In addition, TCF21 loss of heterozygosity and mutational status were examined. Twenty-two cancer cell lines from varied tissue origins were also assayed. The NSCLC results were validated and expanded by examining TCF21 immunohistochemical expression on a tissue microarray containing 300 NSCLC cases. RESULTS:: Overall, 81% of NSCLC samples showed TCF21 promoter hypermethylation, and 84% showed decreased TCF21 protein expression. Multivariate analysis showed that TCF21 expression, although below normal in both histologies, was lower in adenocarcinoma than in squamous cell carcinoma and was not independently correlated with sex, smoking, and EGFR mutation status or with clinical outcome. Cell lines from other cancer types also showed frequent TCF21 promoter hypermethylation. CONCLUSIONS:: Hypermethylation and decreased expression of TCF21 were tumor specific and very frequent in all NSCLCs, even early-stage disease, thus making TCF21 a potential candidate methylation biomarker for early-stage NSCLC screening. TCF21 hypermethylation in a variety of tumor cell lines suggests it may also be a valuable methylation biomarker in other tumor types. Cancer 2010. © 2010 American Cancer Society.
 Small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) is classified into two stages, limited-stage small-cell lung cancer (LS-SCLC) and extensive-stage small-cell lung cancer (ES-SCLC), with ES-SCLC being associated with reduced survival. However, disease stage alone is not a very precise predictor of survival time. The aim of this study is to search for a prognostic indicator that can be used in conjunction with the staging system in SCLC. We performed a prospective analysis of 116 patients with SCLC undergoing standard chemotherapy with or without radiotherapy. Expression levels of 12 tumor markers were measured at the time of diagnosis by a commercial protein chip system, and patients were followed up for a maximum of 54 weeks. CEA was the most frequently detected tumor marker in SCLC, with 32.8% of samples scoring positive, and was also the only marker that correlated with overall survival. The average survival time was 16.78 months for patients with CEA below 5 ng/ml and 11.4 months for patients with CEA above 5 ng/ml (P < 0.001). In contrast, no association was found between tumor stage and overall survival. CEA expression was independent of tumor stage (P = 0.930). CEA is an independent prognostic factor that can be used in conjunction with disease stage in SCLC.
 Purpose: To determine pretreatment serum CYFRA21-1 levels as indicators of poor prognosis in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Methods: 1,202 consecutive patients, diagnosed pathologically with NSCLC from January 1999 to December 2009, were entered in this study. To obtain optimal cutoff points of CYFRA21-1 for these endpoints, a running log-rank statistical method was applied. RESULTS: The cutoff level for the maximum log-rank statistical value of one-year survival in patients with NSCLC was 18.0 ng/ml. These results could be applied to patients with squamous cell carcinoma. In multivariate analysis, elevated (>18.0 ng/ml) levels of CYFRA21-1 was confirmed as being an unfavourable prognostic factor. CONCLUSION: CYFRA21-1 assay has a clinical significance for identifying patients with poor prognosis among those with early and advanced NSCLC. Elevated serum CYFRA21-1 levels at the time of diagnosis may be a useful noninvasive marker for identifying the risk of early death from NSCLC.
 The aim of this study was to compare the utility of gamma camera using a coincidence detection system imaging (CDET) with 18-fluorodeoxyglucose to conventional imaging techniques in the detection of recurrence of non-small cell lung cancer. Sixty-nine patients were randomized into two groups for follow-up after surgery from October 2000 to December 2002. Each patient was evaluated every 6 months by conventional technique imaging in group A (n=33) or CDET imaging in group B (n=36) over two years. The direct costs of each procedure were evaluated. The major endpoint was the number of recurrences or new tumours detected. The two groups were similar. A total of 25 recurrences was detected (9 in group A and 16 in group B). Overall survival was similar in the two groups. CDET imaging was more expensive. CDET imaging provides earlier detection of recurrence, but does not modify survival outcome. Further studies are necessary to demonstrate the impact, if any, of 18-FDG imaging.
 BACKGROUND: p27(Kip1) (p27) plays an important role in cancer cell cycle regulation. Recent evidence however, suggests that p27 may function as an oncogene rather than a tumour suppressor gene. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Ninety-two patients with previously untreated non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) were studied for the association between the immunohistochemical localization of p27 through a semi-quantitative method and time-to-progression (TTP) and overall survival (OS). RESULTS: The relationship between p27 H-Score and both TTP and OS was polynomial. Short TTP in patients with metastasis or whose tumors progressed during the eight-month period after diagnosis was statistically associated with overexpression of PIRH2 (p<0.001). In patients whose tumours progressed later, long TTP was associated with NSCLC of the non-adenocarcinoma type (p=0.027), p27 H-Score (p=0.032) and well-differentiated adenocarcinoma (p=0.047). None of the parameters correlated with duration of OS. CONCLUSIONS: This study showed that p27 H-Score may not appear to be an independent prognostic factor in patients with NSCLC.
 Background/Aim: This study examined whether the polymorphisms at the promoter region of RET gene are associated with the risk of lung cancer in the Korean population. PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 409 Korean lung cancer patients and 409 normal subjects were recruited. PCR-RFLP, SNaP Shot assay and logistic regression analyses were performed to characterize the association between polymorphisms of RET and lung cancer risk. RESULTS: Four SNPs (-1697 C>G, -1260 C>T, -719 C>T, -527 C>A) of RET were selected for large-scale genotyping. Statistical analyses revealed that novel -1260 C > T polymorphism and haplotype 3 (-1697G, -1260T, -719C, and -719C) were associated with the risk of lung cancer; specifically, there were significant associations within subgroups of males and smokers. CONCLUSION: These results demonstrated that this novel polymorphism of the RET gene is associated with an increased risk of lung cancer in the Korean population.
 We sought to determine the molecular basis for the anticancer activities of 5,3'-dihydroxy-3,6,7,8,4'-pentamethoxyflavone (DH-PMF), isolated from Gardenia obtusifolia traditionally used in Thailand for a variety of ailments. As little as 1 μM DH-PMF inhibited the proliferation of prostate, colon, kidney, lung, head and neck, pancreas, breast, leukemia, and myeloma cancer cell lines. DH-PMF also suppressed the colony-forming ability of tumor cells, with 50% inhibition occurring at a dose less than 10 nM. DH-PMF induced G(2)/M and subG(1) cell cycle arrest, increased the levels of p21(WAF1/CIP1) and p27(KIP1), and reduced the expression of cyclin D1, CDC2, and c-MYC. Furthermore, DH-PMF inhibited AKT and glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK3β) activation, reduced cell survival proteins, and induced apoptosis, as indicated by annexin V staining, TUNEL assay, and activation of caspase-8, -9 and -3. Overall, our results demonstrate that DH-PMF induces suppression of cell proliferation through modulation of AKT-GSK3β pathways and induction of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitors.
 Aim: To investigate whether down-regulation of P-glycoprotein (P-gp) is correlated to resistance to cisplatin and VP-16 in four histopathological subtype cell lines of lung cancer (SK-MES-1, SPCA-1, NCI-H-460 and NCI-H-446). MATERIALS AND METHODS: After pretreatment with or without verapamil, the P-gp expression was examined by means of RT-PCR and immunofluorescence. Cell survival on treatment with cisplatin and VP-16 was determined by MTT assay. RESULTS: The expression of P-gp was clearly inhibited by verapamil in all four cell lines. Following pretreatment with verapamil, NCI-H-446 was more sensitive to cisplatin, while SPCA-1, NCI-H-460 and NCI-H-446 were more sensitive to VP-16 compared to the control. CONCLUSION: Down-regulation of P-gp is associated with intrinsic resistance to cisplatin in the NCI-H-446 and to VP-16 in SPCA-1, NCI-H-460 and NCI-H-446 cell lines. These findings indicate that down-regulation of P-gp may be helpful for the reversion of drug resistance in some lung cancer cell line subtypes.
 Aim: To determine whether increasing p53 protein levels confers enhanced chemosensitivity in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). MATERIALS AND METHODS: Three NSCLC cell lines, with different endogenous p53 expression, were transfected with wild-type p53 (wt-p53) or CD-1 (truncated wt-p53) genes. Cells were subsequently treated with cisplatin (CDDP) or paclitaxel (PAX). Cell viability was measured using Alamar Blue Assay. RESULTS: Cells transfected with CD-1 expressed 13-38% higher levels of p53 protein compared to cells transfected with the wt-p53 gene, despite their baseline endogenous levels. CD-1-transfected cells also had higher cell death when treated with CDDP (p<0.05) or PAX, exhibiting 30-60% higher death rates than cells transfected with the wt-p53 gene and 130-160% higher than untransfected cells. A significant positive correlation between p53 protein concentration and cytotoxic response was demonstrated (R(2) for CDDP=0.823; R(2) for PAX=0.909; p<0.001). CONCLUSION: Increasing intracellular p53 protein concentrations can augment the effect of CDDP and PAX in NSCLC, despite the baseline level of p53 protein expression.
 The p53 tumor suppressor is negatively regulated by murine double minute 2 (MDM2), which binds to p53 and promotes p53 ubiquitination and degradation. MDM2 inhibitor-219 (MI-219), a small molecule MDM2 inhibitor, was recently reported to disrupt p53-MDM2 binding, leading to p53 activation and suppression of tumor cell growth both in vitro and in vivo. This study tested the efficacy of MI-219 against a panel of lung cancer cell lines alone or in combination with MDM2 knockdown, an X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP) inhibitor, or a chemotherapeutic drug, etoposide. When acting alone, MI-219 selectively inhibited growth of wild-type (wt) p53-containing lung cancer cells by induction of G(1) or G(2) arrest in a p53-dependent manner, but had a minor effect on wt p53-bearing immortalized cells. MDM2 knockdown had a minimal effect on MI-219 induced growth suppression. Although MI-219 increased XIAP expression, blockage of XIAP via SM-164, a Smac mimetic compound, did not selectively enhance MI-219 cytotoxicity. Significantly, MI-219 sensitized lung cancer cells to etoposide-induced cell killing. This study revealed that, when acting alone, MI-219 selectively inhibits the growth of lung cancer cells harboring a wt p53. In combination, MI-219-induced cytotoxicity was not affected by MDM2 knockdown nor by a XIAP inhibitor, but MI-219 sensitized cancer cells to etoposide, suggesting MI-219 could serve as a chemosensitizing agent.
 PURPOSE: We conducted a first-in-human phase I study to determine the dose-limiting toxicity (DLT), evaluate the pharmacokinetic profile, and document any antitumor activity of NK012, a novel SN-38-incorporating micellar nanoparticle. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Patients with solid tumors refractory to standard therapy, or for which no standard therapy is available, were enrolled. NK012 was administered as a 30-minute infusion every 3 weeks. The starting dose was 2 mg/m(2) as SN-38 equivalent, and an accelerated titration schedule was used. Pharmacokinetic analysis was conducted in cycles 1 and 2. RESULTS: Twenty-four patients were enrolled in the study. No UGT1A1*28 homozygous patients were enrolled. Predominant toxicity was neutropenia. Nonhematologic toxicity, especially diarrhea, was mostly grade 1 or 2 during study treatments. Two of nine patients had DLT during cycle 1 at the 28 mg/m(2) dose level. DLTs were mostly neutropenia or a related event. Polymer-bound SN-38 (NK012) and SN-38 released from NK012 were slowly eliminated from the plasma, with a terminal-phase half-life of approximately 140 and 210 hours, respectively. Systemic exposure to both polymer-bound SN-38 and SN-38 increased in proportion to the dose. A refractory esophageal cancer patient and a lung carcinoid tumor patient had an objective response and continued the study treatment for 5 and 12 months, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: NK012 was well tolerated and showed antitumor activity including partial responses and several occurrences of prolonged stable disease across a variety of advanced refractory cancers. Phase II studies are ongoing. Clin Cancer Res; 16(20); 5058-66. ©2010 AACR.
 Pulmonary neuroendocrine (NE) tumors include a spectrum of tumors from the low-grade typical carcinoid (TC) and intermediate-grade atypical carcinoid (AC) to the high-grade large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNEC) and small-cell carcinoma (SCLC). Nodular NE proliferations ≥0.5 cm are classified as carcinoid tumors and smaller ones are called tumorlets. When NE cell hyperplasia and tumorlets are extensive they represent the rare preinvasive lesion for carcinoids known as diffuse idiopathic pulmonary NE cell hyperplasia. Carcinoid tumors have significant clinical, epidemiologic and genetic differences from the high-grade SCLC and LCNEC. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type I can be found in TC and AC patients but not those with LCNEC and SCLC. Also both LCNEC and SCLC can demonstrate histologic heterogeneity with other major histologic types of lung carcinoma such as adenocarcinoma or squamous cell carcinoma, but is not characteristic of TC or AC. Genetic changes are very high in SCLC and LCNEC, but usually low for TC, intermediate for AC. The diagnosis of SCLC, TC and AC can be made by light microscopy without the need for special tests in most cases, but for LCNEC it is required to demonstrate NE differentiation by immunohistochemistry or electron microscopy.
 The paradigm for first-line treatment of relapsed or metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is changing. Large phase III trials demonstrated that, in 2010, we cannot select a therapy without an accurate definition of tumor histology and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) status. Patients harboring an EGFR-activating mutation have a better prognosis and certainly are extremely sensitive to EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors, while other agents, such as bevacizumab or pemetrexed, are more effective and less toxic in patients with non-squamous histology. Moreover, data from large phase III trials demonstrated that maintenance therapy with pemetrexed, docetaxel or erlotinib is an effective strategy against metastatic NSCLC. Overall, the changing paradigm in first-line treatment of NSCLC inevitably is changing the second-line strategy. In addition, the emerging role of maintenance therapy is leading to early use of all agents potentially active in a second- or third-line setting, with the consequence that very few options are available at disease progression. The aim of this article is to discuss the consequences of targeted treatments for second-line therapy in metastatic NSCLC.
 Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for 80% of all lung cancer, which is the leading cause of cancer mortality. The majority of NSCLC patients present with advanced disease at diagnosis. Standard chemotherapy using platinum-containing doublets has reached a therapeutic plateau with a median survival of ∼1 year. The development of more effective strategies in the first-line setting remains challenging. In selected chemotherapy-naïve, advanced, non-squamous patients, the combination of bevacizumab with chemotherapy was shown to produce better outcomes than chemotherapy alone. The potential benefit of maintenance/sequential treatment after initial platinum-based chemotherapy should be discussed in detail with each patient. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation determination should be carried out in subgroups of patients characterized by a high prevalence of sensitizing mutations. When a mutation is present, first-line treatment with an EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor may be considered. Finally, a phase I study using an oral ALK inhibitor has produced promising results in NSCLC patients with ALK rearrangements, indicating that ALK represents a new therapeutic target in a molecularly defined subset of NSCLC. Ongoing studies in first-line therapy are focusing on targeted therapies and patient selection.
 Until recently the major clinical question was 'Is it small-cell or non small-cell cancer'. However, advances in conventional and targeted therapy have completely changed the landscape. Identification of the major non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) types (adenocarcinoma and squamous carcinoma) are important for a number of predictive and prognostic reasons, including pemetrexed treatment, anti-angiogenic therapy and administration of tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Fortunately, advances in pathology of lung cancer have kept abreast, with newer, simplified methods to identify the major NSCLC types in small diagnostic samples, and modifications of the pathological classification of adenocarcinomas reflecting changing clinical and molecular concepts. For the patient to obtain maximum benefit from the recent developments in therapeutics, a multidisciplinary approach is required with co-operation between oncologists, surgeons, radiologists and pathologists.
 Adjuvant platinum-based chemotherapy represents the standard of care in fit stage II and IIIA non-small-cell lung cancer patients after surgical resection. This review discusses current knowledge on molecular prognostic and predictive tumor features for benefit from adjuvant therapies with emphasis on ongoing clinical trials that prospectively assess the biomarker utility. Until the results of these trials are available, use of these markers is not recommended in routine clinical care.
 Following the 1995 meta-analysis on the role of postoperative chemotherapy in NSCLC, many randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have evaluated the effect of adjuvant cisplatin-based chemotherapy in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), adding substantially to the existing evidence. The LACE pooled analysis included a total of 4584 patients accrued in five recent cisplatin-based adjuvant trials. It confirmed the benefit of adjuvant chemotherapy (P = 0.0043). In addition, it showed that adjuvant cisplatin-based chemotherapy is detrimental in stage IA resected NSCLC; it also indicated that the combination of vinorelbine and cisplatin offered a higher benefit compared with older doublets or triplets. The individual-databased meta-analysis was also updated with a total of >10 000 patients. It confirmed the significant effect of postoperative chemotherapy, with or without postoperative radiotherapy, with an overall significant benefit of 4% at 5 years. The recent results of biological programmes indicate that the expression of some tumour markers including ERCC1 be evaluated in order to determine which patients are more likely to benefit from chemotherapy. If these results are confirmed, tailored therapy might be the next progress for resected NSCLC.
 Staging of non-small-cell lung cancer is a multidisciplinary process involving imaging, endoscopic and surgical techniques. Accuracy is vital in order to avoid false-positive interpretations leading to a false stage III or IV diagnosis in early stage patients, or false-negative findings leading to a false early stage diagnosis in patients with mediastinal lymph node disease. CT scan offers great anatomical detail of tumour spread, but radiological imaging lacks information on the biological nature of the lesions. The latter is brought in by 2-[fluorine-18] fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) scan as a metabolic imaging tool, which, however, has clearly lower spatial resolution. Therefore, contemporary staging relies on the combination of both, preferably in a fusion PET-CT scan. Absence of suspected lymph node metastasis on both CT and PET has a high negative predictive value, and these patients may in general proceed to surgery. In most others, tissue confirmation of the locoregional lymph node status is needed. The historical standard of mediastinoscopy is nowadays complemented by endoscopic techniques by the bronchial or esophageal approach. Each of these techniques remains important in modern staging algorithms. A practical scheme for rational staging in clinical practice is discussed.
 Novel antitumor active functional polymers with supramacromolecular structures were synthesized by a complex-radical terpolymerization of N-isopropylacrylamide (NIPAm), 3,4-dihydro-2H-pyran (DHP), and maleic anhydride (MA) with 2,2'-azoisobisbutyronitrile as a radical initiator in 1,4-dioxane at 65°C under nitrogen atmosphere. The structure and composition of terpolymers were investigated by (1)H ((13)C) NMR spectroscopy. Interaction of terpolymers with human lung small cell carcinoma (SCLC) were investigated by using different methods such as cytotoxicity, statistical, apoptotic and necrotic cell indexes, double staining and caspase-3 immunostaining, light and fluorescence inverted microscopy analyses. Investigations into structure, composition, and antitumor activity relationships revealed that terpolymers containing a combination of ionisable amide-pyran linkages and H-bonded carboxylic groups exhibited higher cytotoxicity. It was observed that terpolymer with nearly alternating structure provides a maximum concentration of ionisable and H-bonded antitumor sites, and therefore, exhibits higher in vitro cytotoxicity, apoptotic and necrotic effects towards SCLC cancer cells.
 AIMS: To correlate the pre-treatment plasma Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) DNA with tumour burden and to explore the prognostic implications of pre- and post-treatment plasma EBV DNA load in nasopharyngeal carcinoma patients treated with radiotherapy. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Plasma EBV DNA load was measured using a real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction assay in 69 patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma before and after radiation treatment and correlated with tumour volume and treatment outcome. Tumour volume was calculated by multiplying the sum of the areas of gross extent of the primary tumour and regional lymph nodes shown by computed tomography images and/or magnetic resonance imaging. Prognostic models for distant metastasis and overall survival were constructed using a multivariable fractional polynomial algorithm. RESULTS: The pre-treatment plasma EBV DNA concentration was significantly associated with tumour volume (Spearman correlation coefficient, 0.61; P<0.001). The multivariable fractional polynomial algorithm selected post-treatment EBV DNA and administration of chemotherapy as prognostic factors for distant metastasis (P<0.001, P=0.021, respectively), as well as for overall survival (P<0.001, P=0.018, respectively). CONCLUSIONS: Pre- and post-treatment plasma EBV DNA load have important clinical significance. Pre-treatment plasma EBV DNA concentration reflects tumour burden, whereas clearance of circulating plasma EBV DNA after treatment predicts the risk of distant metastasis and overall survival.
 Platinum-based chemotherapy is the most common treatment for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and expression levels of drug metabolism and transport proteins are correlated with its efficacy and toxicity. In this study, we investigated the association of three putative functional polymorphisms of ABCC2 (C-24T, G1249A, and C3972T) with tumor response and occurrence of the grade 3 or 4 toxicity in 445 patients with stage III and IV NSCLC treated with platinum-based chemotherapy. We determined the genotypes of these three polymorphisms by the matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MassArray) method. We found that the common homozygotes of -24C was associated with a better treatment response (adjusted odds ratios [ORs], 1.84; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.05-3.23; P=0.032). Furthermore, patients with 3972T had increased risk of severe thrombocytopenia toxicity (adjusted OR, 2.43; 95% CI, 1.06-5.56; P=0.034); and in female subgroup analyses, this variant was associated with significantly increased risk of overall toxicity (adjusted OR, 2.63; 95% CI, 1.17-5.95; P=0.02), particularly of hematologic toxicity (adjusted OR, 3.80; 95% CI, 1.62-8.87; P=0.002). Moreover, -24T/3972T haplotype was also associated with significantly increased risk of hematologic toxicity. Our results suggested that C-24T variants had an effect on treatment response and that C3972T had an effect on severe toxicities among platinum-treated non-small cell lung cancer patients.
 The effects of mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) on the growth and metastasis of human malignancies including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) are controversial, and the underlying mechanisms are not yet understood. The aim of this study was to explore the role of MSC in the progression of HCC. We investigated the effect of MSC on in vitro proliferation and invasion and in vivo tumor growth and pulmonary metastasis of MHCC97-H HCC cells with a high metastatic potential. The mRNA and protein levels of transforming growth factor-beta 1 (TGFβ1) and MMP, and their association with the effects of MSC on HCC cells were also evaluated. Co-culture of MHCC97-H cells with MSC conditioned medium significantly enhanced in vitro proliferation but inhibited invasiveness. Following MSC treatment of a nude mouse model bearing human HCC, the MSC were predominantly located in the HCC tissues. Compared with controls, MSC-treated mice exhibited significantly larger tumors (3080.51 ± 1234.78 mm(3) vs 2223.75 ± 1000.60 mm(3) , P = 0.045), but decreased cellular numbers of lung metastases (49.75 ± 18.86 vs 227.22 ± 74.67, P = 0.046). Expression of TGFβ1 and MMP-2 was significantly downregulated in the MSC-treated HCC cells. TGFβ siRNA concurrently downregulated expression of TGFβ and MMP-2 in HCC cells and blocked the MSC-induced proliferation and invasiveness of MHCC97-H cells. The MSC enhanced tumor growth but significantly inhibited the invasiveness and metastasis of HCC, possibly through downregulation of TGFβ1. These findings suggest that MSC could be useful in controlling metastatic recurrence of HCC. (Cancer Sci, doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01738.x, 2010).
 Abstract Introduction: The World Health Organization (WHO) explicitly recommends the integration of palliative care (PC) early in the disease trajectory as part of the WHO definition of PC. Our comprehensive cancer center decided: (1) to include this recommendation in the administrative directives for principles of cancer care and (2) to establish a PC hospital support team. The evaluation of this approach revealed that patients with lung cancer still received PC rather late in the course of the disease. Therefore, we decided to additionally develop disease-specific standard operating procedures (SOPs) to try to overcome these deficiencies. The first SOP was completed for patients with lung cancer. Standard Operating Procedure (Consensus SOP): Specifically, the SOP states that: &#x201C;Specialized PC is recommended regularly for all lung cancer patients without curative treatment options, specifically patients with (i) metastasized and inoperable or (ii) locally advanced and inoperable or (iii) relapsing lung cancer. Integration of PC is recommended simultaneously to starting tumor-specific therapy. In this context, initial PC should be delivered to the patient at the same place as specific treatment, which is the interdisciplinary outpatient unit of the Center of Integrated Oncology (CIO) or an oncological ward.&#x201D; Discussion: This SOP for the first time presents disease-specific guidelines for PC integration into comprehensive (lung) cancer therapy by (1) defining &#x201C;green flags&#x201D; for early integration of PC and (2) recommending PC parallel to initiation of anticancer therapy. Furthermore, clear definitions are provided to delineate PC assignments. Such disease-specific algorithms should be helpful to further reduce uncertainty about the way PC can be integrated early in the course of the disease.
 Abstract Objective: Although the efficacy of a number of drugs for the second-line treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has been demonstrated in Phase III trials, very limited evidence exists on optimal duration of second-line treatment or the reasons why this treatment is stopped in standard clinical practice. SELECTTION (Survey in European Lung Cancer Evaluating Choice of Treatment and Tolerability In Observed NSCLC) was designed to assess the time from initiation of second-line treatment for NSCLC to treatment discontinuation for any reason, the reasons for discontinuation, and the impact of discontinuation on outcomes. Methods: From October 2006 to January 2008, 1012 patients with advanced/metastatic NSCLC who completed or discontinued first-line treatment were enrolled in a multi-national, prospective observational cohort study (SELECTTION). Treatment cohorts were constructed based on the patients&#x2019; distribution across second-line treatments that were assigned by physician decision (pemetrexed, docetaxel, erlotinib, other treatments). This report presents a descriptive analysis of the baseline data collected, including patient/disease characteristics, treatment history and planned second-line treatments. Factors that may have affected treatment choice, selected by physicians from a range of options, were also identified. Results: Overall, 468 patients (46.2%) were enrolled in the pemetrexed cohort, 232 (22.9%) in docetaxel cohort, 206 (20.4%) in erlotinib cohort and 106 (10.5%) received other treatments. The profile of patients enrolled in the erlotinib cohort differed from those of patients enrolled in the pemetrexed or docetaxel cohorts in that erlotinib was more frequently planned for women, never-smokers and patients with adenocarcinomas. The primary reasons physicians gave for selection of the second-line treatment were tolerance and efficacy for pemetrexed, and preferred regimen for the particular patient and efficacy for the other treatments. Conclusions: In this observational study, pemetrexed, then docetaxel and erlotinib were the most frequently prescribed second-line treatments, which is in line with international guidelines. Erlotinib was most commonly prescribed to that subset of patients expected to gain the greatest benefit (those with adenocarcinoma, never-smokers and females). Pemetrexed was more frequently prescribed than docetaxel, with physicians most commonly choosing to prescribe the former agent because of its tolerability profile.
 A water-insoluble anti-tumor agent, Paclitaxel (PTX) was successfully incorporated into polymeric micelles formed from new graft copolymers, N-octyl-N-(2-carboxyl-cyclohexamethenyl) chitosan derivatives(OCCC). The objective of this study was to optimize and characterize the novel PTX micelle (PTX-M). Furthermore, the pharmacokinetics, NIR-imaging, biodistribution, and anti-tumor effects of PTX-M were evaluated. The results showed that the PTX-M had high drug loading (43.25%). The V<inf>d</inf> and t<inf>1/2</inf><inf>&#x03B2;</inf> of PTX-M were increased by 11.4- and 2.83-fold, respectively, but the plasma AUC of PTX-M was 3.8-fold lower than that of Taxol. Biodistribution study indicated that PTX-M was widely distributed into most tissues, most of them found in liver, spleen, lung, and kidney. This result was similar with NIR(near-infrared)-imaging. Tumor growth was significantly inhibited after intravenous injection of PTX-M. PTX-M showed the enhanced anti-tumor effect and non-toxic effects compared with Taxol, the commercial product of PTX. Therefore, the chitosan-derived micelle system offered a stable and effective platform for cancer chemotherapy with PTX.
 Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a heterogeneous illness associated with a high mortality rate. Personalized therapy may improve treatment outcomes by identification of a specific genotypic anomaly and target-specific therapy. The most significant development in recent years was the discovery of activated EGF receptor (EGFR) mutations at exons 19 and 21. Patients with EGFR mutations respond dramatically to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as gefitinib or erlotinib, resulting in longer progression-free survival. Multiple randomized studies, including the Iressa Pan-Asia Study and WJTOG3405, have confirmed the role of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors as standard first-line therapy for patients with the EGFR mutation. In this article, we summarize the current nonpersonalized therapies and examine the available and investigational personalized therapies for patients with resectable early-stage, unresectable locally advanced, or metastatic disease.
 As diagnostic and therapeutic options increase, strategies for the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) are becoming more tailored for specific patient subpopulations and individual patients. The introduction of therapy targeted against the EGF receptor (EGFR) pathway has provided new treatment options for select patients with NSCLC. However, more than half of unselected NSCLC patients will fail to achieve disease stabilization on an EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), and secondary resistance is observed in virtually all patients who initially respond or achieve disease stabilization. Efforts are underway to identify clinical and molecular predictors in patients who may benefit from treatment with EGFR TKIs. Recent strategies for targeting the EGFR pathway include combining EGFR TKIs with newer agents and developing second-generation irreversible EGFR TKIs, which may be used in patients who have failed treatment with first-generation EGFR TKIs.
 Lung cancer research has incorporated molecular medicine into the management of this disease during the last 5 years. Several novel tumorigenesis pathways associated with lung cancer development and proliferation have been discovered and further developed as targets. The idea behind this is to deliver individualized therapy for each patient based on his/her tumor phenotype, which may involve the overexpression or lack of certain proteins, receptors, mutations and other factors. To date, many of these characteristics have been shown to have a potential role as prognostic or predictive biomarkers, with most of the available data being obtained from retrospective analyses, various laboratory platforms, and data sets used for comparison. However, well-designed prospective randomized clinical trials are underway to validate the significance and future role of these novel biomarkers, allowing us to sort out the best personalized management for an individual with lung cancer diagnosis. Nevertheless, one of these features, the EGF receptor (EGFR) gene mutation, has emerged as a prognostic and strongly predictive biomarker when EGFR inhibition is used as a therapy for tumors that harbor the mutation. Our article displays the most recently developed data related to this biomarker and what have we learned based on the analyses of clinical trials that have studied different agents in the clinical arena.
 Lung carcinoma is one of the most common cancers diagnosed in the USA. A significant portion of these patients have a history of tobacco use and many are smoking at the time of diagnosis. Despite smoking cessation interventions, many patients continue to smoke even after their diagnosis. Those who are able to quit smoking after their diagnosis still have a high rate of relapse of smoking within the first year. Continued smoking has been found to have multiple negative consequences for these patients including increased toxicity from treatment and decreased effectiveness of therapy. Overall, patients who continue to smoke after their diagnosis have poorer outcomes than those patients who are successfully able to quit and abstain from smoking. Knowing this, physicians should encourage smoking cessation in this patient population. Future studies are needed to help define the best approach for encouraging smoking cessation, taking into account patient characteristics and the stress associated with the lung cancer diagnosis.
 Purpose: To evaluate the necessity and direct cost effectiveness of screening and staging procedures in breast cancer patients having ≥4 positive axillary lymph nodes and to identify further possible biopathological risk factors associated with increased risk of metastasis. Methods: We reviewed the demographic and clinicopathological data from the medical records of 1897 newly diagnosed breast cancer patients. Patients having ≥4 positive axillary lymph nodes after primary surgery for breast cancer and who had staging examinations for metastasis were eligible. The impact of staging procedures (thoracoabdominal CT, bone scan etc.) for detecting metastasis, decision of adjuvant treatment and direct costs were analyzed in 329 patients with operable breast cancer. Results: Thirty-five (10.6%) patients were found with metastasis at diagnosis. Seven (20.0%) among them had multiple metastases. Eighteen (51.4%) had lung, 17 (48.6%) bone, and 7 (20.0%) liver metastasis. Twenty-one (60.0%) patients needed further radiological investigation for metastasis confirmation. Treatment decision was changed in 27 (77.1%) patients. No statistically significant risk factor was identified among the metastatic patients by means of conventional demographic and biopathological parameters. The cost of screening was lower when compared to the cost of treatment without any screening procedure. Conclusion: Since the conventional clinicopathological data seems not sufficient to define the risk of developing metastasis in breast cancer patients with ≥4 axillary lymph node involvement, all of them should undergo full staging examinations until new parameters based on genomic level are defined. Staging procedures need modification for high risk breast cancer patients.
 Purpose: Positron emission tomography (PET) is an important imaging technique for the diagnosis and staging of patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In this study, we evaluated the standardized uptake values (SUV) of PET in NSCLC patients to determine whether there was a cut-off value for predicting response to treatment and survival. Methods: We retrospectively analyzed 149 patients with locally advanced NSCLC. All the patients were staged by PET-computerized tomography (CT) after diagnosis. (18) fluoro-2- deoxyribose (FDG) was used as the PET tracer. Univariate and multivariate analyses were performed to detect whether any prognostic factors were related to response to treatment. Results: The median patient age was 60 years and the median follow-up time 10.3 months. One-year progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) rates were 31% and 58.7%, respectively. The median OS was 15.4 months. Stage, sex and response to treatment were important factors for OS and PFS. We defined a cut-off value for SUVmax (the highest standardized uptake value for all cross sectional areas) as 10.8 by using ROC analysis. Multivariate analysis identified response to treatment as the most significant (p<0.05) prognostic factor for OS. Logistic regression analysis showed that SUVmax and weight loss were important for response to treatment. Conclusion: Multivariate analysis indicated that whilst response to treatment was an important factor for predicting survival, the SUVmax was also significant for determining response to therapy and a cut-off value for SUVmax was defined as 10.8.
 The Fas/Fas Ligand (FasL) system and survivin have counteracting roles in cell survival. Therefore, we explored the role of circulating soluble Fas (sFas) and the tissue levels of Fas and survivin with regard to response to chemotherapy in lung cancer patients. Serum samples from 52 lung cancer patients and 54 control subjects (19 benign lung disease and 35 healthy control subjects) were collected prior to and 24 and 48 h after chemotherapy. sFas was statistically significantly higher in the cancer group than that in the control groups (p < 0.001). Baseline (before chemotherapy) sFas values showed a statistically significant inverse correlation with overall survival (r = -0.599, p < 0.001). There was a significant increase in serum sFas levels 24 h after treatment (p < 0.05). Contrarily, tissue levels of Fas and survivin were not changed following the chemotherapy (p > 0,05). In conclusion, increased sFas may be an indicator of poor outcome in lung cancer patients. However, cisplatin-based chemotherapy may not be effective via neither the Fas/FasL system nor survivin pathway. Indeed, larger sample size is required for further evaluation. Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
 Aging is a natural process characterized by a progressive functional impairment and reduced capacity to respond adaptively to environmental stimuli. Aging is associated with increased susceptibility to a variety of chronic diseases, including type 2 diabetes mellitus, cancer, and neurological diseases. Lung pathologies are not the exception, and the prevalence of several interstitial lung diseases (ILDs), primarily idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, has been found to increase considerably with age. Although our understanding of the biology of aging has advanced remarkably in the last 2 decades, the molecular mechanisms linking aging to ILD remain unclear. Immunosenescence, oxidative stress, abnormal shortening of telomeres, apoptosis, and epigenetic changes affecting gene expression have been proposed to contribute to the aging process, and aging-associated diseases. Here, we review the emerging concepts highlighting the putative aging-associated abnormalities involved in some human ILDs.
 Various tumors metastasize to the lung, and they are often detected as multiple nodules. We report on two cases of such multiple lung metastases combined with primary lung cancer: a myxoid liposarcoma in the right thigh and a colon cancer. In each case, a pulmonary metastasectomy revealed that one of the tumors was primary lung cancer. Regardless of recent advances in computed tomography for detecting small pulmonary nodules and ground-glass opacity components, which indicate possible primary lung cancer, the preoperative differential diagnosis for either metastatic or primary lung cancers is usually difficult because they are too small to obtain enough tissue for diagnosis, except by surgery. When nodules are removed and diagnosed as lung metastasis combined with primary lung cancer, additional treatment should be considered depending on the prognosis of each disease.
 The prognosis of patients with CNS involvement of solid tumors is poor. In these patients, systemic chemotherapy has a theoretical advantage of concurrent treatment of systemic disease and reduced risk of neurotoxicity. Here, we report on the efficacy and toxicity of topotecan/ifosfamide (TOPO/IFO) combination chemotherapy in patients treated for CNS involvement of different solid malignancies. Fourteen patients with CNS manifestations (seven with brain metastases, two meningeal carcinomatosis, and five both) of solid tumors (seven with breast cancer, six lung cancer, and one unknown primary cancer) received TOPO/IFO treatment. Eleven patients each were pretreated with 1-6 systemic therapy regimens and whole-brain irradiation. Patients received a total of 34 (median 2) TOPO/IFO cycles. TOPO dosage was 3.6 mg/m(2) (1.2 mg/m(2), days 1-3) and IFO dosage 3,000 mg/m(2) (1,500 mg/m(2), days 1-2) per cycle. Of 12 patients with brain metastases, one patient had partial remission, three stable disease, two progressed, and six had no radiologic CNS response evaluation. Response of meningeal carcinomatosis was found in two and progressive disease in two (three patients not evaluated). Neurologic improvement or stabilization was observed in six of twelve evaluable patients. No systemic tumor response was seen in seven evaluated patients. Grade 3/4 toxicities in eleven evaluable patients were leukopenia (n = 9), infection (n = 6), and thrombopenia (n = 5). Median time to treatment failure was 43 days and median overall survival 107 days. Symptom control was frequently achieved with TOPO/IFO systemic chemotherapy despite a low objective response rate. The feasibility of this treatment is impaired by severe hematotoxicity.
 Background:Current international guidelines recommend the use of platinum-based chemotherapy with thoracic radiotherapy (TRT) for patients with locally advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).Methods:Patients with unresectable stage IIIA or IIIB NSCLC were treated with nedaplatin (NP) at 50 mg m(-2) and irinotecan (CPT) at 60 mg m(-2) on days 1 and 8 every 4 weeks for two to four cycles with concurrent TRT (2 Gy per day, total 60 Gy).Results:All 35 patients were able to receive a total of 60 Gy. Adverse effects and events in chemotherapy with TRT were grade 3 or 4 anaemia, neutropenia and thrombocytopenia, which occurred in 3.0%, 32.8% and 6.0% of patients, respectively. There was no grade 3 pneumonitis or oesophagitis. Adverse effects and events in chemotherapy alone were mild. There was no treatment-related death. An overall response rate was 94.3%. The median progression-free and overall survivals were 13.0 and 36.0 months, respectively. The 5-year disease-free and overall survival rates were 25.7% and 40.0%, respectively.Conclusion:NP and CPT treatment with concurrent TRT is effective and safe for patients with unresectable, locally advanced NSCLC.British Journal of Cancer advance online publication, 12 October 2010; doi:10.1038/sj.bjc.6605875 www.bjcancer.com.
 This study aimed to identify factors predictive of the benefit of respiratory-gated radiotherapy. Three plans were created for 25 patients with non-small cell lung cancer, simulating the following 3 treatment scenarios. Protocol 1 was non-gated and the lung dose was calculated using 4-s slow CT (PnA), protocol 2 was also non-gated and the lung dose was calculated by CT at the end-expiration phase (PnE), and protocol 3 applied phase-based gating around end-expiration (PgE). We correlated possible predictive factors with the estimated lung dose reduction achieved by respiratory gating. The 3D clinical target volume (CTV) motion, craniocaudal CTV motion, and the craniocaudal CTV position were correlated with the reduction in V20 and the mean lung dose (p < 0.01). CTV was not significantly correlated with the estimated lung dose reduction. The area under the ROC curve (AUC) for 3D- and craniocaudal CTV motion, and craniocaudal CTV position was 1.000, 0.997, and 0.943, respectively, when the threshold for selecting patients was set at a 1% reduction of V20 and at a 0.5 Gy reduction in the mean lung dose. The results of the present study suggest that 3D CTV motion, craniocaudal CTV motion, and the craniocaudal CTV position are useful for predicting the benefit of respiratory-gated radiotherapy in lung cancer patients.
 G9a is a mammalian histone methyltransferase that contributes to the epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressor genes. Emerging evidence suggests that G9a is required to maintain the malignant phenotype, but the role of G9a function in mediating tumor metastasis has not been explored. Here, we show that G9a is expressed in aggressive lung cancer cells, and its elevated expression correlates with poor prognosis. RNAi-mediated knockdown of G9a in highly invasive lung cancer cells inhibited cell migration and invasion in vitro and metastasis in vivo. Conversely, ectopic G9a expression in weakly invasive lung cancer cells increased motility and metastasis. Mechanistic investigations suggested that repression of the cell adhesion molecule Ep-CAM mediated the effects of G9a. First, RNAi-mediated knockdown of Ep-CAM partially relieved metastasis suppression imposed by G9a suppression. Second, an inverse correlation between G9a and Ep-CAM expression existed in primary lung cancer. Third, Ep-CAM repression was associated with promoter methylation and an enrichment for dimethylated histone H3K9. G9a knockdown reduced the levels of H3K9 dimethylation and decreased the recruitment of the transcriptional cofactors HP1, DNMT1, and HDAC1 to the Ep-CAM promoter. Our findings establish a functional contribution of G9a overexpression with concomitant dysregulation of epigenetic pathways in lung cancer progression. Cancer Res; 70(20); 7830-40. ©2010 AACR.
 Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is an aggressive malignancy with extremely high mortality due to the appearance of widespread metastases early in its clinical course and rapid acquisition of chemoresistance after initial therapy. A theory of cell adhesion-mediated drug resistance is thought to be a principal mechanism in which extracellular matrix proteins provide a survival advantage against cytotoxic drug-induced apoptosis. We found that the tetraspanin family member CD9 was expressed preferentially in SCLC tumors and metastases from three of seven relapsed patients, whereas chemonaïve primary tumors from 16 patients were CD9 negative with only one exception. Additionally, CD9 was highly expressed on SCLC cell lines rendered resistant to cisplatin or etoposide, and was upregulated in parental chemosensitive cells within 48 hours after exposure to either of these compounds. CD9-expressing chemoresistant SCLC cells adhered more tightly to fibronectin via β1 integrin, but they were less motile than the respective chemosensitive parental lines. Notably, treatment of the chemoresistant cells with chemokine CXCL12 downregulated CD9 and transiently restored motility. Moreover, selective targeting of CD9 by treatment with specific monoclonal antibody ALB6 or a small interfering RNA triggered apoptosis in the chemoresistant cells. Taken together, our findings implicate CD9 in the cell adhesion-mediated drug resistance mechanism, highlighting CD9 as an attractive therapeutic target to improve therapeutic outcomes in SCLC. Cancer Res; 70(20); 8025-35. ©2010 AACR.
 Elevated expression of the NEDD9/HEF1/Cas-L scaffolding protein promotes tumor cell invasion and metastasis in multiple cancer cell types. Conversely, generation of mammary tumors in the mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV)-polyoma virus middle T (PyVT) genetic model is delayed by a Nedd9(-/-) genotype. These activities arise from the role of NEDD9 in assembling complexes and supporting activity of cancer signaling proteins, including FAK, Src, Shc, and AKT, and would support evaluation of NEDD9 expression as an unambiguous biomarker for tumor aggressiveness. However, we here show that despite the initial delay in tumor growth, cells derived from MMTV-PyVT;Nedd9(-/-) tumors are characteristically hyperaggressive versus MMTV-PyVT;Nedd9(+/+) cells in anchorage-independent growth, in growth on three-dimensional matrix produced by tumor-associated fibroblasts, and in formation of tumors after mammary orthotopic reinjection and of lung metastases after tail vein injection. This reversal suggests the specific selection of MMTV-PyVT;Nedd9(-/-) cells for growth in an in vivo microenvironment. Indeed, MMTV-PyVT;Nedd9(-/-) cells have increased cell cycle, centrosomal, and mitotic defects, phenotypes compatible with the increased selection of these cells for aggressive growth. Intriguingly, in spite of their aggressive phenotype, MMTV-PyVT;Nedd9(-/-) cells persistently have low levels of Src activation and are hypersensitive to the Src kinase inhibitor dasatinib. These studies identify NEDD9 as a complex modulator of different aspects of mammary tumor growth. Cancer Res; 70(21); OF1-10. ©2010 AACR.
 RalA and RalB are monomeric G proteins that are 83% identical in amino acid sequence but have paralogue-specific effects on cell proliferation, metastasis, and apoptosis. Using in vitro kinase assays and phosphosite-specific antibodies, here we show phosphorylation of RalB by protein kinase C (PKC) and RalA by protein kinase A. We used mass spectrometry and site-directed mutagenesis to identify S198 as the primary PKC phosphorylation site in RalB. Phorbol ester [phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA)] treatment of human bladder carcinoma cells induced S198 phosphorylation of stably expressed FLAG-RalB as well as endogenous RalB. PMA treatment caused RalB translocation from the plasma membrane to perinuclear regions in a S198 phosphorylation-dependent manner. Using RNA interference depletion of RalB followed by rescue with wild-type RalB or RalB(S198A) as well as overexpression of wild-type RalB or RalB(S198A) with and without PMA stimulation, we show that phosphorylation of RalB at S198 is necessary for actin cytoskeletal organization, anchorage-independent growth, cell migration, and experimental lung metastasis of T24 or UMUC3 human bladder cancer cells. In addition, UMUC3 cells transfected with a constitutively active RalB(G23V) exhibited enhanced subcutaneous tumor growth, whereas those transfected with phospho-deficient RalB(G23V-S198A) were indistinguishable from control cells. Our data show that RalA and RalB are phosphorylated by different kinases, and RalB phosphorylation is necessary for in vitro cellular functions and in vivo tumor growth and metastasis. Cancer Res; 70(21); OF1-10. ©2010 AACR.
 CONTEXT: Cancer screening has been integrated into routine primary care but does not benefit patients with limited life expectancy. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the extent to which patients with advanced cancer continue to be screened for new cancers. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Utilization of cancer screening procedures (mammography, Papanicolaou test, prostate-specific antigen [PSA], and lower gastrointestinal [GI] endoscopy) was assessed in 87,736 fee-for-service Medicare enrollees aged 65 years or older diagnosed with advanced lung, colorectal, pancreatic, gastroesophageal, or breast cancer between 1998 and 2005, and reported to one of the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) tumor registries. Participants were followed up until death or December 31, 2007, whichever came first. A group of 87,307 Medicare enrollees without cancer were individually matched by age, sex, race, and SEER registry to patients with cancer and observed over the same period to evaluate screening rates in context. Demographic and clinical characteristics associated with screening were also investigated. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: For each cancer screening test, utilization rates were defined as the percentage of patients who were screened following the diagnosis of an incurable cancer. RESULTS: Among women following advanced cancer diagnosis compared with controls, at least 1 screening mammogram was received by 8.9% (95% confidence interval [CI], 8.6%-9.1%) vs 22.0% (95% CI, 21.7%-22.5%); Papanicolaou test screening was received by 5.8% (95% CI, 5.6%-6.1%) vs 12.5% (95% CI, 12.2%-12.8%). Among men following advanced cancer diagnosis compared with controls, PSA test was received by 15.0% (95% CI, 14.7%-15.3%) vs 27.2% (95% CI, 26.8%-27.6%). For all patients following advanced diagnosis compared with controls, lower GI endoscopy was received by 1.7% (95% CI, 1.6%-1.8%) vs 4.7% (95% CI, 4.6%-4.9%). Screening was more frequent among patients with a recent history of screening (16.2% [95% CI, 15.4%-16.9%] of these patients had mammography, 14.7% [95% CI, 13.7%-15.6%] had a Papanicolaou test, 23.3% [95% CI, 22.6%-24.0%] had a PSA test, and 6.1% [95% CI, 5.2%-7.0%] had lower GI endoscopy). CONCLUSION: A sizeable proportion of patients with advanced cancer continue to undergo cancer screening tests that do not have a meaningful likelihood of providing benefit.
 Several heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) inhibitors are currently under clinical evaluation as anti-cancer agents. However, the correlation between the duration and magnitude of Hsp90 inhibition and the downstream effects on client protein degradation and cancer cell growth inhibition has not been thoroughly investigated. To investigate the relationship between Hsp90 inhibition and cellular effects, we developed a method that measures drug occupancy on Hsp90 after treatment with the Hsp90 inhibitor IPI-504 in living cells and in tumor xenografts. In cells, we find the level of Hsp90 occupancy to be directly correlated with cell growth inhibition. At the molecular level, the relationship between Hsp90 occupancy and Hsp90 client protein degradation was examined for different client proteins. For sensitive Hsp90 clients (e.g., human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), client protein levels directly mirror Hsp90 occupancy at all time points after IPI-504 administration. For insensitive client proteins, we find that protein abundance matches Hsp90 occupancy only after prolonged incubation with drug. Additionally, we investigate the correlation between plasma pharmacokinetics (PK), tumor PK, pharmacodynamics (PD) (client protein degradation), tumor growth inhibition and Hsp90 occupancy in a xenograft model of human cancer. Our results indicate Hsp90 occupancy to be a better predictor of PD than either plasma PK or tumor PK. In the non-small cell lung cancer xenograft model studied, a linear correlation between Hsp90 occupancy and tumor growth inhibition was found. This novel binding assay was evaluated both in vitro and in vivo, and could be used as a pharmacodynamic readout in the clinic.
 PURPOSE Previous studies have shown increased risks of second malignancies after non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL); however, no earlier investigation has quantified differences in risk of new malignancy by lymphoma subtype. PATIENTS AND METHODS We evaluated second cancer and leukemia risks among 43,145 1-year survivors of CLL/small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL), diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), or follicular lymphoma (FL) from 11 Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) population-based registries during 1992 to 2006. Results Among patients without HIV/AIDS-related lymphoma, lung cancer risks were significantly elevated after CLL/SLL and FL but not after DLBCL (standardized incidence ratio [SIR], CLL/SLL = 1.42, FL = 1.28, DLBCL = 1.00; Poisson regression P for difference among subtypes, P(Diff) = .001). A similar pattern was observed for risk of cutaneous melanoma (SIR: CLL/SLL = 1.92, FL = 1.60, DLBCL = 1.06; P(Diff) = .004). Acute nonlymphocytic leukemia risks were significantly elevated after FL and DLBCL, particularly among patients receiving initial chemotherapy, but not after CLL/SLL (SIR: CLL/SLL = 1.13, FL = 5.96, DLBCL = 4.96; P(Diff) < .001). Patients with HIV/AIDS-related lymphoma (n = 932) were predominantly diagnosed with DLBCL and had significantly and substantially elevated risks for second anal cancer (SIR = 120.50) and Kaposi's sarcoma (SIR = 138.90). CONCLUSION Our findings suggest that differing immunologic alterations, treatments (eg, alkylating agent chemotherapy), genetic susceptibilities, and other risk factors (eg, viral infections, tobacco use) among lymphoma subtypes contribute to the patterns of second malignancy risk. Elucidating these patterns may provide etiologic clues to lymphoma as well as to the second malignancies.
 PURPOSE Distress has been recognized as the sixth vital sign in cancer care and several guidelines recommend routine screening. Despite this, screening for distress is rarely conducted and infrequently evaluated. METHODS A program of routine online screening for distress was implemented for new patients with breast and lung cancer. Patients were randomly assigned to one of three conditions: (1) minimal screening: the distress thermometer (DT) only plus usual care; (2) full screening: DT, problem checklist, Psychological Screen for Cancer part C measuring anxiety and depression, a personalized report summarizing concerns and the report on the medical file; or (3) triage: full screening plus optional personalized phone triage with referral to resources. Patients in all conditions received an information packet and were reassessed 3 months later with the full screening battery. Results Five hundred eighty-five patients with breast cancer and 549 patients with lung cancer were assessed at baseline (89% of all patients), and 75.5% retained for follow-up. High prevalence of baseline distress was found across patients. Twenty percent fewer patients with lung cancer in triage continued to have high distress at follow-up compared to those in the other two groups, and patients with breast cancer in the full screening and triage conditions showed lower distress at follow-up than those in minimal screening. The best predictor of decreased anxiety and depression in full screening and triage conditions was receiving a referral to psychosocial services. CONCLUSION Routine online screening is feasible in a large cancer center and may help to reduce future distress levels, particularly when coupled with uptake of appropriate resources.
 PURPOSE To identify polymorphisms in DNA repair genes that affect responses to platinum-based doublet chemotherapy in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). PATIENTS AND METHODS In total, 640 patients with NSCLC who received platinum-based doublet chemotherapy in the National Cancer Center Hospital in Japan from 2000 to 2008 and whose responses were evaluated by Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) participated in a study of the association between response and genotypes for 30 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 27 DNA repair genes. Candidate SNPs were selected in a discovery set of 201 patients, and their associations were validated in an independent set of 439 patients by prespecified P value criteria. Results Homozygotes for the minor allele TP53-72Pro of the Arg72Pro SNP in the TP53 gene showed a better response rate (54.3%) than those for the major allele TP53-72Arg (29.1%; P = 4.4 × 10(-5)) irrespective of therapeutic regimens, and minor allele homozygotes had significantly longer progression-free and overall survivals than major allele homozygotes (hazard ratio [HR], 0.85; 95% CI, 0.74 to 0.98; P = .020; and HR, 0.86; 95% CI, 0.74 to 0.99; P = .039). Minor allele carriers for SNP Lys940Arg in the poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) gene showed a better response rate to the paclitaxel regimen (45.8%) than to the gemcitabine regimen (10.5%; P for interaction = .019). CONCLUSION Polymorphisms in the TP53 and PARP1 genes are involved in inter-individual differences in the response to platinum-based doublet chemotherapy in patients with NSCLC.
 PURPOSE IPI-504 is a novel, water-soluble, potent inhibitor of heat-shock protein 90 (Hsp90). Its potential anticancer activity has been validated in preclinical in vitro and in vivo models. We studied the activity of IPI-504 after epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) therapy in patients with advanced, molecularly defined non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). PATIENTS AND METHODS Patients with advanced NSCLC, prior treatment with EGFR TKIs, and tumor tissue available for molecular genotyping were enrolled in this prospective, nonrandomized, multicenter, phase II study of IPI-504 monotherapy. The primary outcome was objective response rate (ORR). Secondary aims included safety, progression-free survival (PFS), and analysis of activity by molecular subtypes. Results Seventy-six patients were enrolled between December 2007 and May 2009 from 10 United States cancer centers. An ORR of 7% (five of 76) was observed in the overall study population, 10% (four of 40) in patients who were EGFR wild-type, and 4% (one of 28) in those with EGFR mutations. Although both EGFR groups were below the target ORR of 20%, among the three patients with an ALK gene rearrangement, two had partial responses and the third had prolonged stable disease (7.2 months, 24% reduction in tumor size). The most common adverse events included grades 1 and 2 fatigue, nausea, and diarrhea. Grade 3 or higher liver function abnormalities were observed in nine patients (11.8%). CONCLUSION IPI-504 has clinical activity in patients with NSCLC, particularly among patients with ALK rearrangements.
 With the increased use of tyrosine kinase inhibitors as successful therapy in selected malignancies, their adverse effects will grow, especially when combination therapy is used. We present a relatively young patient who was successfully treated with erlotinib and sunitinib for her metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), but died because of the serious event of a necrotizing pancreatitis with severe hypocalcaemia, which we suppose to be an adverse event of the therapy used.
 BACKGROUND: Fibronectin (FN) is known to be a large multifunction glycoprotein with binding sites for many substances, including N-terminal and C-terminal heparin-binding domains. We investigated the effects of highly purified rhFNHN29 and rhFNHC36 polypeptides originally cloned from the two heparin-binding domains on the adhesion and invasion of highly metastatic human hepatocellular carcinoma cells (MHCC97H) and analyzed the underlying mechanism involved. METHODS: The MHCC97H cells that adhered to FN in the presence of various concentrations of rhFNHN29 and rhFNHC36 polypeptides were stained with crystal violet and measured, and the effects of rhFNHN29 and rhFNHC36 on the invasion of the MHCC97H cells were then detected using the Matrigel invasion assay as well as a lung-metastasis mouse model. The expression level of integrins and focal adhesion kinase (FAK) phosphotyrosyl protein was examined by Western blot, and the activity of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and activator protein 1 (AP-1) was analyzed by gelatin zymography and the electrophoretic mobility band-shift assay (EMSA), respectively. RESULTS: Both of the polypeptides rhFNHN29 and rhFNHC36 inhibited adhesion and invasion of MHCC97H cells; however, rhFNHC36 exhibited inhibition at a lower dose than rhFNHN29. These inhibitory effects were mediated by integrin alphavbeta3 and reversed by a protein tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor. Polypeptides rhFNHN29 and rhFNHC36 abrogated the tyrosine phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase (p-FAK) and activation of activator protein 1 (AP-1), resulting in the decrease of integrin alphav, beta3 and beta1 expression as well as the reduction of MMP-9 activity. CONCLUSIONS: Polypeptides rhFNHN29 and rhFNHC36 could potentially be applicable to human liver cancer as anti-adhesive and anti-invasive agents.
 INTRODUCTION: Primary tumors of seminal vesicles are rare and only a few cases have been reported. Diagnosis is difficult due to the absence of early clinical signs. Prognosis is generally poor. CASE PRESENTATION: We present the case of a 70-year-old Caucasian man with a seminal vesicle mass and concomitant lymph node metastasis detected by computed tomography and body positron emission tomography/low-dose computed tomography scan carried out for evaluation of Lambert Eaton syndrome. Transrectal ultrasound-guided biopsy showed a poorly differented neuroendocrine carcinoma with an immunhistochemical profile similar to small cell lung cancer. Following chemotherapy the disease was stable and active surveillance was initiated. CONCLUSIONS: Lambert Eaton syndrome may be the initial symptom of a seminal vesicle mass. Diagnosis needs to be obtained by transrectal biopsy and chemotherapy may delay progression of the tumor.
 Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death worldwide. Survival remains poor as approximately 80% of cases present with advanced stage disease. However, new treatments are emerging which offer hope to patients with advanced disease. Insights into cell biology have identified numerous intracellular and extracellular peptides that are pivotal in cancer cell signalling. Disrupting the function of these peptides inhibits intracellular signal transduction and diminishes uncontrolled proliferation, resistance to apoptosis and tumour angiogenesis. The most widely studied signalling pathway is the Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF) pathway. EGF signalling can be disrupted at numerous points. Blockade of the cell surface receptor is achieved by the monoclonal antibody cetuximab; intracellular tyrosine kinase activity is inhibited by erlotinib. Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) regulates another pathway important for tumour growth. Inhibition of VEGF impairs angiogenesis and disrupts metastatic spread. Bevacizumab is a monoclonal antibody that binds to VEGF and blocks interaction with its cell surface receptor. Clinical trials have demonstrated that disruption of these signalling pathways can improve survival in advanced lung cancer. New compounds including folate antimetabolites such as pemetrexed, proteasome inhibitors such as bortezomib, modified glutathione analogues such as TLK286, and other agents such as epothilones and other small molecules are currently being evaluated in patients with lung cancer. As more and more signalling peptides are targeted for manipulation, it is hoped that a new era is dawning in the treatment of advanced stage lung cancer. This review will focus on emerging new therapies in the management of lung cancer.
 ABSTRACT Lung cancer, specifically non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), is a leading cause of mortality worldwide. In China, a dramatic increase in the incidence of NSCLC is expected in the next 20 years (Molina et al. Mayo Clin Proc. 2008;83:584&#x2013;594). Mutated epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) status is a known predictor of response to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), and immunohistochemistry may be a less costly way of predicting presence of mutation. In this study, mutation analysis of EGFR in 218 cases of NSCLC was performed. One hundred thirty tissue samples were examined via immunohistochemistry of p-EGFR (Y1045 and Y1068) and correlated with mutation status. Mutations were seen in 29% of patients, and were correlated with female sex, nonsmoking history, and adenocarcinoma histology. Phosphorylation at Y1045 was noted in 52% of cases, but in 71% of cases with EGFR mutation (P = .003). Phosphorylation of Y1068 was seen in 55% of cases but in 73% of cases with EGFR mutation (P = .006). This study correlating EGFR mutation with p-EGFR expression in resected NSCLC is one of the largest to date, although TKI response could not be assessed. The data show that, among Chinese patients, detection of p-1045 and p-1068 expression with immunohistochemistry predicts EGFR mutations. Immunohistochemical analysis of p-EGFR may be useful to predict responses to TKI therapy, although future studies are necessary.
 Po and Pb were discovered in tobacco in 1964. This was followed by detailed assessments of the nature of their deposition, and accompanying dose rates to the lungs of cigarette smokers. Subsequent studies revealed: (1) the sources and pathways through which they gain access to tobacco; (2) the mechanisms through which they preferentially deposit in key segments of the bronchial epithelium; and (3) the fact that the accompanying alpha radiation plays a synergistic role in combination with the chemical carcinogens, to increase the fatal cancer risk coefficient in cigarette smokers by a factor of 8 to 25. Nonetheless, it was not until 2009 that Congress mandated that the Food and Drug Administration require that the cigarette industry reveal the presence of these carcinogens. In the meantime, cigarette smoking has become not only the number one source of cancer deaths in the United States, but also a major contributor to heart disease and other health impacts. If the latter effects are included, smoking is estimated to have caused an average of 443,000 deaths and 5.1 million years of potential life lost among the U.S. population each year from 2000 through 2004. The estimated associated collective dose is more than 36 times that to the workers at all the U.S. nuclear power plants, U.S. Department of Energy nuclear weapons facilities, and crews of all the vessels in the U.S. Nuclear Navy. This unnecessary source of lung cancer deaths demands the utmost attention of the radiation protection and public health professions.
 Alternative splicing is a crucial step in the generation of protein diversity and its misregulation is observed in many human cancer types. By analyzing 143 colorectal samples using exon arrays, SLC39A14, a divalent cation transporter, was identified as being aberrantly spliced in tumor samples. SLC39A14 contains two mutually exclusive exons 4A and 4B and the exon 4A/4B ratio was significantly altered in adenomas (p=3.6x10-10) and cancers (p=9.4x10-11), independent of microsatellite stability status. The findings were validated in independent exon array data sets and by quantitative real-time reverse-transcription PCR (qRT-PCR). Aberrant Wnt signaling is a hallmark of colorectal tumorigenesis and is characterized by nuclear β-catenin. Experimental inactivation of Wnt signaling in DLD1 and Ls174T cells by knockdown of β-catenin or overexpression of dominant negative TCFs (TCF1 and TCF4) altered the 4A/4B ratio, indicating that SLC39A14 splicing is regulated by the Wnt pathway. An altered 4A/4B ratio was also observed in gastric and lung cancer where Wnt signaling is also known to be aberrantly activated. The splicing factor SRSF1 and its regulator, the kinase SRPK1, were found to be deregulated upon Wnt inactivation in colorectal carcinoma cells. SRPK1 was also found upregulated in both adenoma samples (p=1.5x10-5) and cancer samples (p=5x10-4). In silico splicing factor binding analysis predicted SRSF1 to bind predominantly to the cancer associated exon 4B, hence, it was hypothesized that SRPK1 activates SRSF1 through phosphorylation, followed by SRSF1 binding to exon 4B and regulation of SLC39A14 splicing. Indeed, siRNA-mediated knockdown of SRPK1 and SRSF1 in DLD1 and SW480 colorectal cancer cells led to a change in the 4A/4B isoform ratio, supporting a role of these factors in the regulation of SLC39A14 splicing. In conclusion, alternative splicing of SLC39A14 was identified in colorectal tumors and found to be regulated by the Wnt pathway, most likely through regulation of SRPK1 and SRSF1.
 Background Accurate estimates of cancer survival are important for assessing optimal patient care and prognosis. Evaluation of these estimates via relative survival (a ratio of observed and expected survival rates) requires a population life table that is matched to the cancer population by age, sex, race and/or ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and ideally risk factors for the cancer under examination. Because life tables for all subgroups in a study may be unavailable, we investigated whether cause-specific survival could be used as an alternative for relative survival. Methods We used data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program for 2 330 905 cancer patients from January 1, 1992, through December 31, 2004. We defined cancer-specific deaths according to the following variables: cause of death, only one tumor or the first of multiple tumors, site of the original cancer diagnosis, and comorbidities. Estimates of relative survival and cause-specific survival that were derived by use of an actuarial method were compared. Results Among breast cancer patients who were white, black, or of Asian or Pacific Islander descent and who were older than 65 years, estimates of 5-year relative survival (107.5%, 106.6%, and 103.0%, respectively) were higher than estimates of 5-year cause-specific survival (98.6%, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 98.4% to 98.8%; 97.4%, 95% CI = 96.2% to 98.2%; and 99.2%, 95% CI = 98.4%, 99.6%, respectively). Relative survival methods likely underestimated rates for cancers of the oral cavity and pharynx (eg, for white cancer patients aged ≥65 years, relative survival = 54.2%, 95% CI = 53.1% to 55.3%, and cause-specific survival = 60.1%, 95% CI = 59.1% to 60.9%) and the lung and bronchus (eg, for black cancer patients aged ≥65 years, relative survival = 10.5%, 95% CI = 9.9% to 11.2%, and cause-specific survival = 11.9%, 95% CI = 11.2 % to 12.6%), largely because of mismatches between the population with these diseases and the population used to derive the life table. Socioeconomic differences between groups with low and high status in relative survival estimates appeared to be inflated (eg, corpus and uterus socioeconomic status gradient was 13.3% by relative survival methods and 8.8% by cause-specific survival methods). Conclusion Although accuracy of the cause of death on a death certificate can be problematic for cause-specific survival estimates, cause-specific survival methods may be an alternative to relative survival methods when suitable life tables are not available.
 In a previously developed mouse model, arsenic exposure in utero induces tumors at multiple sites in the offspring as adults, often duplicating human targets. However, human environmental inorganic arsenic exposure occurs during the entire life span, not just part of gestation. Thus, "whole life" inorganic arsenic carcinogenesis in mice was studied. CD1 mice were exposed to 0, 6, 12 or 24 ppm arsenic in the drinking water two weeks prior to breeding, during pregnancy, lactation, and after weaning through adulthood. Tumors were assessed in offspring until 2 years of age. Arsenic induced dose-related increases in lung adenocarcinoma (both sexes), hepatocellular carcinoma (both sexes), gallbladder tumors (males) and uterine carcinomas. Arsenic induced dose-related increases in ovarian tumors (including carcinomas) starting with the lowest dose. Adrenal tumors increased at all doses (both sexes). Arsenic-induced lung and liver cancers were highly enriched for cancer stem cells, consistent with prior work with skin cancers stimulated by prenatal arsenic. Reproductive tract tumors over-expressed cyclooxygenase-2 and estrogen receptor-α. Arsenic target sites were remarkably similar to prior transplacental studies, although tumors from whole life exposure were generally more aggressive and frequent. This may indicate arsenic-induced events in utero dictate target site in some tissues while other exposure periods of arsenic enhance incidence or progression, though other factors could be at play, like cumulative dose. Whole life arsenic exposure induced tumors at dramatically lower external doses than in utero arsenic only, while more realistically duplicating human exposure.
 BACKGROUND: Cancer cachexia adversely affects survival and quality of life but its timely recognition is problematic. Nutritional questionnaires, like the Mini Nutritional Assessment (MNA), could identify early those patients at risk. The aim of the study was to compare MNA with 5% weight loss, a common criterion used in oncologic evaluation. PATIENTS AND METHODS: The nutritional status of 171 chemotherapy-naive patients with metastatic lung cancer was evaluated by both methods. The results were compared and correlated with clinical and laboratory values and with clinical outcome. RESULTS: The incidence of malnourished or patients at risk was higher according to the MNA (P < 0.001). Both methods correlated with the performance status (P < 0.001) but MNA was further correlated with the number of metastatic sites (P = 0.007) and the presence of brain metastasis (P = 0.022). Of 14 laboratory values studied, 9 were correlated with MNA and 5 with the weight loss history. Both methods were correlated with response to first-line therapy, time to progression and survival but MNA had a better predictive (P < 0.001) and prognostic (P < 0.001) value. CONCLUSIONS: MNA outperforms weight loss history as a baseline nutritional screening method in patients with metastatic lung cancer and could further refine prognostication.
 Apigenin (4,5,7-trihydroxyflavone), a promising chemopreventive agent presented in fruits and vegetables, has been shown to induce cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in many types of human cancer cell lines. However, there is no available information to address the effects of apigenin on human lung cancer H460 cells. In the present studies, H460 cells were treated with apigenin for different time and then were analyzed for the morphological changes, induction of apoptosis, protein levels associated with apoptosis and results in dose-dependent induction of morphological changes, decrease in the percentage of viability, induced DNA damage and apoptosis; down-modulation of the protein expression of Bid, Bcl-2, procaspase-8; up-regulation of protein levels of Bax, caspase-3, AIF, cytochrome c, GRP78 and GADD153; decreased the levels of mitochondrial membrane potential and increased the productions of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and Ca(2+) in H460 cells. Taken together, this is the first systematic in vitro study showing the involvement of apoptosis regulatory proteins as potential molecular targets of apigenin in human lung cancer H460 cells.
 OBJECTIVE: A single-agent topotecan has an indication for the treatment of small cell lung cancer in Japan. Previous studies demonstrated that topotecan combined with a platinum agent could provide additional antitumor efficacy. This study was to find the recommended dose of topotecan in combination with cisplatin and preferred administration sequence in untreated patients with extensive disease small cell lung cancer for Phase II study. METHODS: Patients received topotecan as a 30 min infusion for 5 days in escalating doses (starting at 0.5 mg/m(2)/day), and cisplatin at a fixed dose of 60 mg/m(2), 3 weeks cycle. This study employed the following stages: cisplatin was given before topotecan on day 1 to previously treated patients (Stage 1). After the maximum-tolerated dose level was achieved, the same schedule was applied for untreated patients (Stage 2). Subsequently, cisplatin was given after topotecan on day 5 to untreated patients (Stage 3). The recommended doses of cisplatin on day 1 and 5 schedules were estimated by considering results obtained from Stages 2 and 3, respectively. RESULTS: A total of 34 patients were enrolled. The maximum-tolerated doses in Stages 1-3 were estimated at 0.65, 0.65, and 1.4 mg/m(2), respectively. The recommended doses of cisplatin on day 1 and 5 schedules in untreated patients were determined at 0.65 and 1.0 mg/m(2), respectively. The major toxicity in this combination was hematological events. CONCLUSIONS: For treatment-naive patients, the combined use of 0.65/60 mg/m(2) topotecan/cisplatin with cisplatin on day 1 schedule or 1.0/60 mg/m(2) topotecan/cisplatin with cisplatin on day 5 schedule is recommended for Phase II study.
 Bleomycin treatment of A549 cells induces senescence rather than apoptosis, a more usual response of cancer cells to cytotoxic drugs. We have previously shown that upregulation of caveolin-1, the main structural component of caveolae, plays a key role in this process. In order to gain a better understanding of the molecular basis of this phenomenon, caveolin-1-enriched microdomains of untreated and bleomycin-treated growth-arrested A549 cells were analysed for differential protein expression using 2-D DIGE followed by LC-MS/MS. One of these differentially expressed proteins was found to be the multidrug resistance-associated protein (MGr1-Ag). We show that MGr1-Ag becomes partly localised in lipid rafts following bleomycin treatment, and that MGr1-Ag and caveolin-1 occur in a common protein complex in vivo using co-immunoprecipitation studies. GST pull-down assays demonstrated an increased interaction between MGr1-Ag and caveolin-1 following bleomycin treatment in vitro. Our results reveal MGr1-Ag as a novel lipid raft protein; its increased association with caveolin-1 in bleomycin-induced cell cycle arrest and subsequent cellular senescence might contribute to the success of chemotherapy.
 MALAT-1, a long noncoding RNA, is associated with metastasis, but its role in the metastatic process remains unknown. Here, we show that short-interfering RNA-mediated MALAT-1 silencing impaired in vitro cell motility of lung cancer cells and influenced the expression of numerous genes. In these genes, knockdown of any one of CTHRC1, CCT4, HMMR, or ROD1 clearly inhibited cell migration. In MALAT-1 knockdown cells, pre-mRNA levels were decreased in some but not all genes. Thus, our findings suggest that MALAT-1 is a novel class of noncoding RNA that promotes cell motility through transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation of motility related gene expression.
 BACKGROUND: Urokinase plasminogen activating (uPA) system is implicated in neoplastic progression. High tissue levels of uPA system components correlate with a poor prognosis in lung cancer. The present study examined the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of uPA and the corresponding receptor, uPAR, for exploring their roles in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). METHODS: The allele frequencies and genotype distributions of uPA rs4065 C/T and uPAR rs344781 (-516 T/C) among 375 NSCLC cases and 380 healthy controls were examined using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment-length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) analysis. Putative association between the above SNPs and clinicopathological characteristics of NSCLC were also analyzed. RESULTS: The genotype frequencies of the variant homozygotes of uPA and uPAR were significantly different between NSCLC and control subjects. Significant association was also observed between the examined genotypes and disease stage of NSCLC. Logistic regression analysis revealed that individuals with uPA rs4065 TT genotype have higher odds ratios (ORs) for lung cancer. Whereas, subjects with uPAR-344781 CC genotype have lower ORs for lung cancer. The patients carrying a homozygous TT genotype at uPA rs4065, or at least a T allele at uPAR-344781 (-516), had a tendency to develop advanced disease. CONCLUSIONS: Our results revealed that genetic polymorphisms of the uPA rs4065 C/T and uPAR rs344781 (-516 T/C) were associated with the susceptibility and severity of NSCLC.
 Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (ErbB2) amplification and overexpression has been seen in many cancer types including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Thus, ErbB2 is an important target for cancer therapies. Increased ErbB2 expression has been associated with drug resistance in cancer cells. Herceptin is a humanized monoclonal antibody that targets the extracellular domain of ErbB2. In this study, we aimed to block ErbB2 signaling with Herceptin and assess cytotoxicity and effects on apoptosis, oxidative stress, nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-kB), and Survivin expression in Calu-3 cell line. 3-(4,5-dimethyl-2-thiazolyl)-2,5-diphenyl-2H-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay were used to assess cell viability as a marker of proliferation. Acridine orange/ethidium bromide (AO/EB) staining and caspase 3/7 activity were measured as the markers of apoptosis. The relative expressions of NF-kB-p50 and Survivin mRNAs were evaluated. Activities of antioxidant enzymes such as superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT), and the levels of glutathione (GSH) and reactive oxygen species (ROS) were determined in a time- and dose-dependent manner. Our results show that Herceptin treatment inhibits cell proliferation and activates apoptosis but without effects on Survivin and NF-kB expression in Calu-3 cell line. Intracellular glutathione levels and SOD and CAT activities were decreased in a time- and dose-dependent manner associated with oxidative stress. Also, ROS were increased at 24 h. These results provide evidence that Herceptin can be used as a cytotoxic and apoptotic agent in NSCLC.
 PURPOSE: : To investigate therapeutic outcome of dose escalation ≥ 80 Gy in nonresected non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). PATIENTS AND METHODS: : 124 consecutive patients with histologically/cytologically proven NSCLC were enrolled. Tumor stage I, II, IIIA, and IIIB was diagnosed in 30, eight, 39, and 47 patients, respectively. 38 patients (31%) had weight loss > 5% during the 3 months before diagnosis. A median dose of 88.2 Gy (range 80.0-96.0 Gy), 69.3 Gy (63.0-88.0 Gy) and 56.7 Gy was applied to primary lesions, involved lymph nodes, and elective nodes (within a region of about 6 cm cranial to macroscopically involved nodes), respectively. Daily fractional ICRU doses of 2.0-2.2 Gy were delivered by the conformal target-splitting technique. 58 patients (47%) received induction chemotherapy, in median two cycles prior to radiotherapy. RESULTS: : Median follow-up time of all patients was 19 months, of patients alive 72.4 months (69-121 months). The cumulative actual overall survival rate at 2 and 5 years amounts to 39% and 11.3%, respectively, resulting in a median overall survival time of 19.6 months. According to stages I, II, IIIA, and IIIB, the median overall survival times are 31.8, 31.4, 19.0, and 14.5 months, respectively. The locoregional tumor control rate at 2 years is 49%. Apart from one treatment-related death (pneumonitis), acute toxicity according to EORTC/RTOG scores was moderate: lung grade 2 (n = 7), grade 3 (n = 3); esophagus grade 1 (n = 11); heart grade 3 (n = 1, pericarditis). No late toxicity grade > 1 has been observed. CONCLUSION: : Sequential, conventionally fractionated high-dose radiotherapy by conformal target splitting is well tolerated. The results for survival and locoregional tumor control seem to at least equalize the outcome of simultaneous chemoradiation approaches, which, at present, are considered "state of the art" for patients with nonresected NSCLC. A higher potential of radiation therapy might be reached by accelerated fractionation regimens.
 Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (HOA) is a disabling condition that may occur secondarily to primary lung cancer. It is characterized by digital clubbing, arthralgia/arthritis, and periostosis of the tubular bones. The pain associated with HOA can be disabling and often refractory to conventional analgesics. We performed a comprehensive review of the literature using the PubMed database on treatment modalities available for HOA. We found 52 relevant articles-40 case reports, six case series, two review papers, and four combined case series and review papers. There were no randomized controlled trials reported. We then classified treatments used for HOA into two categories: (1) treatment of primary cause (i.e., resection of tumor, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, treatment of infection, etc.) and (2) symptomatic treatments (i.e., bisphosphonates, octreotide, NSAIDs, vagotomy, etc.). Subsequently, we summarized the main findings for each treatment. Although the clinical diagnosis of HOA has existed for over 100 years, the pathogenesis mechanism has not yet been elucidated, and treatment options for this condition remain experimental. Primary treatment is the most widely reported modality to be efficacious. In cases which primary therapy is not possible, several symptomatic treatment modalities are suggested, with various degree of success. Further research is needed to clarify the pathophysiological mechanism of HOA as to appropriately direct therapy.
 The outlook for metastatic melanoma to the brain is dismal. New therapeutic avenues are therefore needed. The anti-metastatic mechanisms that may underpin the effects of low molecular weight heparins (LMWHs) in in vitro and preclinical melanoma models warrant translating to a clinical setting. This review outlines a rationale that supports our proposal that metastatic melanoma to the brain is a clinical setting in which to study the anti-metastatic potential of LMWHs. Prevention or delay of brain metastases in melanoma is a clinically relevant and measurable target. Studies to explore the effect of anticoagulants on cancer survival are underway in other malignancies such as lung, pancreas, ovary, breast, and stomach cancer. However, no study to our knowledge has a methodology that could produce clinical evidence in support of a mechanism for whatever benefit may be seen. The setting we propose would allow translation of the molecular knowledge of the metastatic pathways mediated by platelets and the selectins-all potential targets of heparin-in a "time to appearance" of brain metastases endpoint. Since brain metastases are so common and they have a singularly adverse impact on survival, the "biological neuroprotection" model we propose in metastatic melanoma could provide the translational evidence to support the benefit of LMWHs in melanoma. More significantly, this would open the door to a wider "anti-metastatic" approach that could have much greater impact in patients with minimal disease being treated in adjuvant settings for the more common malignancies such as breast and colon cancer.
 Tumour detection, classification, and quantification in positron emission tomography (PET) imaging at early stage of disease are important issues for clinical diagnosis, assessment of response to treatment, and radiotherapy planning. Many techniques have been proposed for segmenting medical imaging data; however, some of the approaches have poor performance, large inaccuracy, and require substantial computation time for analysing large medical volumes. Artificial intelligence (AI) approaches can provide improved accuracy and save decent amount of time. Artificial neural networks (ANNs), as one of the best AI techniques, have the capability to classify and quantify precisely lesions and model the clinical evaluation for a specific problem. This paper presents a novel application of ANNs in the wavelet domain for PET volume segmentation. ANN performance evaluation using different training algorithms in both spatial and wavelet domains with a different number of neurons in the hidden layer is also presented. The best number of neurons in the hidden layer is determined according to the experimental results, which is also stated Levenberg-Marquardt backpropagation training algorithm as the best training approach for the proposed application. The proposed intelligent system results are compared with those obtained using conventional techniques including thresholding and clustering based approaches. Experimental and Monte Carlo simulated PET phantom data sets and clinical PET volumes of nonsmall cell lung cancer patients were utilised to validate the proposed algorithm which has demonstrated promising results.
 The syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion (SIADH), also recently referred to as the "syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis (SIAD)", is an often under diagnosed cause of hypotonic hyponatremia, resulting for instance from ectopic release of ADH in lung cancer or as a side-effect of various drugs. In SIADH, hyponatremia results from a pure disorder of water handling by the kidney, whereas external Na+ balance is usually well regulated. Despite increased total body water, only minor changes of urine output and modest oedema are usually seen. Renal function and acidbase balance are often preserved, while neurological impairment may range from subclinical to lifethreatening. Hypouricemia is a distinguishing feature. The major causes and clinical variants of SIADH are reviewed, with particular emphasis on iatrogenic complications and hospital-acquired hyponatremia. Effective treatment of SIADH with water restriction, aquaretics, or hypertonic saline + loop diuretics, as opposed to worsening of hyponatremia during parenteral isotonic fluid administration, underscore the importance of an early accurate diagnosis and careful follow-up of these patients.
 OBJECTIVE: The objective is to systematically estimate the current cancer incidence and mortality from the six leading cancer types globally and by sub-regions resulting from exposure to known risk factors such as tobacco use, elevated body weight, alcohol consumption, inadequate physical activity, unhealthy diet and infections. METHODS: Cancer incidence, mortality and burden of disease caused by the main cancer risk factors were calculated using comparative risk assessment methods and updated data on mortality and risks. RESULTS: Lung cancer was the most common cancer in men and breast cancer the most common cancer in women, both in terms of incidence and mortality. The five leading behavioral and dietary risks-high body mass index, low fruit and vegetable intake, physical inactivity, tobacco use and alcohol use-were responsible for 24% of new cancer cases and 30% of cancer deaths. Cancers with the largest proportions attributable to preventable risk factors were cervical cancer (100%) and lung cancer (71%). Seventy percent of liver cancers and 60% of stomach cancers were due to infectious agents. A higher proportion of cancer deaths was attributed to infections in low- and middle-income than in high-income countries. CONCLUSIONS: The cancer burden is driven by changes in exposure to influential risk factors and can be influenced by preventive interventions aimed at reducing these exposures.
 Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and its ligands play important roles in the regeneration of damaged epithelium and proliferation of various epithelial tumors. Although the EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor gefitinib is effective against advanced non-small cell lung cancer with EGFR mutations, some patients treated with this agent develop severe acute interstitial pneumonia. Characteristics of patients who develop interstitial pneumonia include older age, smoking history, and preexisting interstitial pneumonia suggesting a connection between airway injury and alveolar dysfunction. The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of gefitinib on airway repair after injury. C57BL/6J mice received intraperitoneally naphthalene at day 0. Gefitinib (20, 90, or 200 mg/kg) was given per os daily at day -1 to 13 after naphthalene administration. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and lung tissue were obtained at day 7 and 14. Terminal bronchial epithelial cells from day 7 and 14 were retrieved with laser capture microdissection, and gene expression analyzed using microarray. Gefitinib treatment following naphthalene prolonged neutrophil sequestration and worsened acute lung injury. We found 17 genes with more than a 3-fold increase in bronchiolar epithelial cells from mice treated with 200 mg/kg of gefitinib following naphthalene at day 14 compared with those treated with naphthalene alone. Upregulated genes included S100A8, S100A6, and StefinA3. These genes are known to participate in neutrophil sequestration, acute inflammation and airway remodeling. We conclude that EGFR inhibition in repairing airway epithelial cells modulated significant expression of genes involved in the airway microenvironment, prolonged inflammation, and potentiated acute lung injury in mice.
 Measurement of carcinogen DNA adducts in blood has been used as a surrogate for the target lung tissue. We aimed to examine whether genetic polymorphisms in several metabolic pathway genes modify the relation between DNA adducts in target lung and blood. One hundred thirty five early-stage lung cancer patients from the Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) were studied. DNA adducts were measured by the (32)P-postlabeling assay in lung and blood mononuclear cells (MNCs) in a subset of 53 who had paired blood samples. SNPs were assessed in genes involved in phase II (GSTs, NAT2, EPHX, and NQO1), DNA repair (ERCC1, ERCC2, and XRCC1) and DNA methylation (MTHFR C677T and A1298C) pathways. There was a significant correlation between DNA adduct levels in lung and blood within the different genotypes, with one exception. Significant modifications in adducts were found by variants in genes for phase II metabolism [NAT2 (1.51 for rapid versus 0.76 for slow, P = 0.022)], DNA repair [ERCC1 C118T (P = 0.014), ERCC2 (P = 0.003), and XRCC1 (P = 0.025)], and MTHFR [C677T (P = 0.005) and A1298C (P = 0.005)]. The relation between DNA adducts in blood MNCs and target lung tissue was significantly modified by the SNP's in the three main pathways. Despite the relatively small sample size, our results suggest that genetic factors may need to be considered when assessing the association of DNA adducts using surrogate tissue in studies of lung cancer. Further studies are needed to better understand their role and the mechanisms.
 Metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1 protein) has been reported to be correlated with the biological behavior and prognosis of several malignant carcinomas. We hypothesized that stage I non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with MTA1 protein overexpression would be more likely to have a poor prognosis. Therefore, we tested the expression of MTA1 protein in 60 stage I NSCLC and 30 paracarcinous normal lung tissues using the streptavidin-perosidase method. The Kaplan-Meier method was used to calculate the survival rate, and Cox regression analysis was performed to identify prognostic risk factors. MTA1 protein overexpression was detected in 22 stage I NSCLC tissues in this study. Tumor differentiation and tumor diameter were significantly associated with MTA1 protein overexpression, while not correlated with age, sex, pathological type or smoking status. The five-year survival rate of patients with MTA1 protein overexpression was significantly lower than that of those without expression (40.9% vs. 84.1%; P<0.001). The results of multivariate analysis confirmed that MTA1 protein overexpression was an independent prognostic factor (RR=5.23, P=0.007). These findings demonstrated MTA1 might be a prognostic factor in NSCLC. Keywords: Non-small cell lung cancer; Metastasis-associated protein 1; Prognosis.
 Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and MET are molecular targets for lung cancer treatment. The relationships between expression, activation, and gene abnormalities of these two targets are currently unclear. Here, we demonstrate that a panel of 40 lung cancer cell lines could be classified into two groups. Group I was characterized by high phosphorylations of MET and EGFR, frequent mutation or amplification of EGFR, MET, and human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2), high expressions of bronchial epithelial markers (thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), MUC1, and Cytokeratin 7 (CK7)); and high expressions of MET, human epidermal growth factor receptor-3, E-cadherin, cyclooxygenase-2, and laminin gamma2. In contrast, Group II exhibited little or no phosphorylation of MET and EGFR; no mutation or amplification of EGFR, MET, and HER2; were triple-negative for TTF-1, MUC1, and CK7; and showed high expressions of vimentin, fibroblast growth factor receptor-1, and transcription factor 8. Importantly, Group I was more sensitive to gefitinib and more resistant to cisplatin and paclitaxel than Group II. The clinical relevance was confirmed in publicly available data on 442 primary lung adenocarcinoma patients; survival benefits by postoperative chemotherapy were seen in only patients with tumors corresponding to Group II. Overall, co-activation of EGFR and MET defines a distinct subgroup of lung carcinoma with characteristic genetic abnormalities, gene expression pattern, and response to chemotherapeutic reagents.
 The Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase (ALK) is a receptor tyrosine kinase first identified as the product of a gene rearrangement in Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma. ALK has subsequently been found to be rearranged, mutated, or amplified in a further series of tumours including neuroblastoma, and Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer. There is strong preclinical evidence that ALK is a driving force for oncogenesis in these cases, and that inhibition of ALK kinase activity results in anti-tumoural efficacy. These observations have sparked the development of small molecule kinase inhibitors, the most advanced of which is currently in clinical testing and which has shown promising preliminary activity in the subset of lung cancer patients whose tumours harbour activated ALK. In this review, we describe the various oncogenic forms of ALK, relevant clinical settings, and give a detailed overview of current drug discovery efforts in the field.
 PURPOSE: Stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) has gained popularity in the treatment of early-stage non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) because of its ability to deliver conformal radiation doses to small targets. However, photon-based SBRT (xSBRT) is associated with significant grade 3+ toxicities. In this study, we compare xSBRT treatment plans with proton-based SBRT (pSBRT) to determine whether dose to normal structures could be reduced if SBRT was delivered with protons. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Eight patients with medically inoperable, peripherally located stage I NSCLC were treated with xSBRT to 48Gy in 4 12-Gy fractions. These patients were retrospectively re-planned using the same treatment volumes with 3-dimensional conformal double-scatter proton therapy. A Wilcoxon paired test compared dosimetric parameters between the plans for each patient. RESULTS: Compared with xSBRT there was a dosimetric improvement with pSBRT for these volumes: lung V5 (median difference [MD]=10.4%, p=0.01); V10 (MD=6.4%, p=0.01); V20 (MD=2.1%, p=0.01); V40 (MD=1.5%, p=0.05); and mean lung dose (MD=2.17Gy, p=0.01). There were also benefits (p=<0.05) in D0.1cm3 and D5cm3 with pSBRT to the heart, esophagus, and bronchus. CONCLUSIONS: In a dosimetric comparison between photon and proton-based SBRT, protons resulted in lower doses to critical organs at risk and a smaller volume of non-targeted normal lung exposed to radiation (V5, V10, V20, and V40). The clinical significance and relevance of these dosimetric improvements remain unknown.
 PURPOSE: To review the dose limits and standardize the three-dimenional (3D) radiographic definition for the organs at risk (OARs) for thoracic radiotherapy (RT), including the lung, proximal bronchial tree, esophagus, spinal cord, ribs, and brachial plexus. METHODS AND MATERIALS: The present study was performed by representatives from the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group, European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer, and Soutwestern Oncology Group lung cancer committees. The dosimetric constraints of major multicenter trials of 3D-conformal RT and stereotactic body RT were reviewed and the challenges of 3D delineation of these OARs described. Using knowledge of the human anatomy and 3D radiographic correlation, draft atlases were generated by a radiation oncologist, medical physicist, dosimetrist, and radiologist from the United States and reviewed by a radiation oncologist and medical physicist from Europe. The atlases were then critically reviewed, discussed, and edited by another 10 radiation oncologists. RESULTS: Three-dimensional descriptions of the lung, proximal bronchial tree, esophagus, spinal cord, ribs, and brachial plexus are presented. Two computed tomography atlases were developed: one for the middle and lower thoracic OARs (except for the heart) and one focusing on the brachial plexus for a patient positioned supine with their arms up for thoracic RT. The dosimetric limits of the key OARs are discussed. CONCLUSIONS: We believe these atlases will allow us to define OARs with less variation and generate dosimetric data in a more consistent manner. This could help us study the effect of radiation on these OARs and guide high-quality clinical trials and individualized practice in 3D-conformal RT and stereotactic body RT.
 As multi-modality treatments are now able to ensure better local control and a lower rate of extra cranial metastases, brain relapse has become a major concern in lung cancer. As survival is poor after development of brain metastases in spite of specific treatment, prophylactic cranial irradiation (PCI) has been introduced in the 70's. PCI has been evaluated in randomized trials in both small-cell (SCLC) and non-small-cell (NSCLC) lung cancers to reduce the incidence of brain metastases and possibly increase survival. PCI reduces significantly the BM rate in both limited disease (LD) and extensive disease (ED) SCLC and in non-metastatic NSCLC. Considering SCLC, PCI significantly improves overall survival in LD (from 15% to 20% at 3years) and ED (from 13% to 27% at 1year) in patients who respond to first-line treatment; it should thus be part of the standard treatment in all responders in ED and in good responders in LD. No dose-effect relationship for PCI was demonstrated in LD SCLC patients so that the recommended dose is 25Gy in 10 fractions. In NSCLC, even if the risk of brain dissemination is lower than in SCLC, it has become a challenging issue. Studies have identified subgroups at higher risk of brain failure. There are more local treatment possibilities for NSCLC patients with BM, but most of them will eventually recur so that PCI should be reconsidered. Few randomized trials have been performed and they were not able to show an effect on survival as they were underpowered. New trials are needed.
 Several novel 6-[(hetero)arylamino]thieno[3,2-b]pyridines were prepared by palladium-catalyzed C-N Buchwald-Hartwig coupling of the methyl 3-amino-6-bromothieno[3,2-b]pyridine-2-carboxylate with aryl and heteroarylamines, using different reaction conditions. The antitumoral activity of the di(hetero)arylamines obtained was evaluated against three representative human tumor cell lines, namely breast adenocarcinoma (MCF-7), melanoma (A375-C5), and non-small cell lung cancer (NCI-H460) and some structure-activity relationships were established within each series. The most promising compounds were shown to be a benzothiazole derivative with GI(50) 3.5-6.9 μM followed by an indole derivative with GI(50) 13-21 μM.
 INTRODUCTION: Topoisomerase inhibitors are active agents in small cell lung cancer (SCLC), and preclinical models indicate that sequential administration of a topoisomerase I inhibitor followed by a topoisomerase II inhibitor can result in enhanced cytotoxicity. PATIENTS AND METHODS: In this phase II study, patients with extensive SCLC were treated with two sequential topoisomerase-based regimens: irinotecan (150mg/m(2))/oxaliplatin (85mg/m(2)) [regimen A] on day 1 followed by etoposide (100mg/m(2)×3)/carboplatin (AUC 6) [regimen B] on day 15. Regimen A was repeated 3 weeks later. The primary objective was objective response rate. Secondary endpoints included progression-free survival (PFS), overall survival (OS), toxicity, and exploratory correlative analysis of the tumor expression of the excision repair cross complementing (ERCC1) and topoisomerase II-α. Patients received a maximum of 5 cycles of sequential therapy of regimen A→B. RESULTS: The overall response rate was 96%, the 6-month PFS was 76.9%, the median PFS was 8.95 months, and OS was 12.9 months in 26 evaluable patients. Grade 4 neutropenia (23%) and thrombocytopenia (58%) were observed with regimen B; and grade 2/3 nausea-vomiting (54%) and diarrhea (46%) with regimen A. Seven patients required dose reductions in regimen A and 19 patients in regimen B. The dose intensity, delivered during the first three cycles was 89%. No significant correlations were observed between the tumor expression of the ERCC1 and topoisomerase II-α and clinical outcomes (PFS or OS). CONCLUSIONS: Although cross-study comparisons are difficult to make, our data suggests that sequential topoisomerase-targeting regimens may enhance the efficacy of chemotherapy in newly diagnosed SCLC patients (Clinical Trial Registration Number, 9 NCT00240097; Clinical Trials.gov number, NCT00240097).
 In developed countries, prostate cancer is the third most common cause of death from cancer in men. Unfortunately, whilst accumulating clinical data have suggested that taxanes may prolong the survival in a subset of men with prostate carcinoma, the dose and duration of administration of these drugs are limited by their significant systemic toxicities due to a lack of tumour selectivity. In an attempt to improve both the water solubility and tumour-targeting properties of paclitaxel (Taxol®), we set out to develop a water soluble paclitaxel prodrug that is activated specifically by prostate-specific antigen (PSA) which is almost exclusively expressed in prostate tissue and prostate carcinoma making it an ideal molecular target for prodrug strategies. Using albumin as a drug carrier, we describe a novel albumin-binding prodrug of paclitaxel, EMC-Arg-Ser-Ser-Tyr-Tyr-Ser-Leu-PABC-paclitaxel [EMC: ε-maleimidocaproyl; PABC: p-aminobenzyloxycarbonyl] that was synthesised by reacting EMC-Arg-Ser-Ser-Tyr-Tyr-Ser-OH with H-Leu-PABC-paclitaxel. This prodrug was water soluble and was bound to endogenous and exogenous albumin. Moreover, incubation studies with PSA demonstrated that the albumin-bound form of the prodrug was cleaved rapidly at the P1-P1' scissile bond releasing the paclitaxel-dipeptide H-Ser-Leu-PABC-paclitaxel. Last but not least, due to the incorporation of a PABC self-eliminating linker, this dipeptide was rapidly degraded to liberate paclitaxel as a final cleavage product within a few hours in prostate tumour tissue homogenates. Of note was that the albumin-bound form of the prodrug was approximately three-fold more active in killing PSA-positive LNCaP cells than paclitaxel. In addition, orientating toxicity studies in mice showed that the maximum tolerated dose of the novel paclitaxel prodrug was twice that of conventional paclitaxel. When tested in vivo in an orthotopic mouse model of human prostate cancer using luciferase-transduced LNCaP LLN cells, both paclitaxel and the new paclitaxel prodrug showed distinct antitumour efficacy on the primary tumour and metastases that was significantly better than the effect of doxorubicin which was used as a comparison and showed no antitumour efficacy. The new paclitaxel prodrug (3×24mg paclitaxel equivalents) showed comparable antitumour activity on the primary tumour to paclitaxel at its maximum-tolerated dose (3×12mg/kg), reduced circulating PSA levels and demonstrated a better antitumour effect on lung metastases but not on bone metastases.
 PURPOSE: The purpose of the present study was to quantify the robustness of the dose distributions from three whole-breast radiotherapy (RT) techniques involving different levels of intensity modulation against whole patient setup inaccuracies and breast shape changes. METHODS AND MATERIALS: For 19 patients (one computed tomography scan and five cone beam computed tomography scans each), three treatment plans were made (wedge, simple intensity-modulated RT [IMRT], and full IMRT). For each treatment plan, four dose distributions were calculated. The first dose distribution was the original plan. The other three included the effects of patient setup errors (rigid displacement of the bony anatomy) or breast errors (e.g., rotations and shape changes of the breast with respect to the bony anatomy), or both, and were obtained through deformable image registration and dose accumulation. Subsequently, the effects of the plan type and error sources on target volume coverage, mean lung dose, and excess dose were determined. RESULTS: Systematic errors of 1-2 mm and random errors of 2-3 mm (standard deviation) were observed for both patient- and breast-related errors. Planning techniques involving glancing fields (wedge and simple IMRT) were primarily affected by patient errors (∼6% loss of coverage near the dorsal field edge and ∼2% near the skin). In contrast, plan deterioration due to breast errors was primarily observed in planning techniques without glancing fields (full IMRT, ∼2% loss of coverage near the dorsal field edge and ∼4% near the skin). CONCLUSION: The influences of patient and breast errors on the dose distributions are comparable in magnitude for whole breast RT plans, including glancing open fields, rendering simple IMRT the preferred technique. Dose distributions from planning techniques without glancing open fields were more seriously affected by shape changes of the breast, demanding specific attention in partial breast planning techniques.
 OBJECTIVE: The genes KRAS and EGFR have emerged as potential targets for therapy in lung adenocarcinoma; mutations in these genes can be found in almost half of patients. In anticipation of the clinical importance of molecularly defined adenocarcinoma subgroups for the treatment of patients with resected stages I through III lung adenocarcinoma, the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) Departments of Surgery and Pathology have collaborated since 2006 to conduct reflex testing of tumor specimens for EGFR and KRAS mutations. METHODS: Using established methods, the identification of EGFR exon 19 deletions and exon 21 L858R mutations was performed. In samples lacking these 2 sensitizing EGFR mutations, KRAS analysis was done. RESULTS: We studied a total of 1831 patients who had stage I through IV lung adenocarcinomas and detected 448 KRAS and 364 EGFR mutations. Of these patients, a subset of 855 (78%) patients with stages I through III adenocarcinoma of the lung who underwent curative surgical resection at MSKCC were tested. In patients with early stage disease, 158 EGFR mutations and 207 KRAS mutations were detected. CONCLUSIONS: The results of the first 3 years of reflex testing at MSKCC reported here demonstrate the feasibility, clinical utility, and potential of this approach. This information allowed for enrollment of patients into clinical trials to explore mutation-specific, directed therapy and led to retrospective studies related to patient outcome. In addition, it may inform selection of chemotherapy for recurrent disease and may help to distinguish multiple primary tumors from metastatic disease.
 OBJECTIVE: Low-dose chest computed tomography (CT) is being evaluated in several national trials as a screening modality for the early detection of lung cancer. The goal of the present study was to determine whether lung cancer screening could be done while minimizing the number of benign biopsy specimens taken in an area endemic for histoplasmosis. METHODS: The subjects were recruited by letters mailed to area physicians and local advertisement. The inclusion criteria were age older than 50 years and at least a 20 pack-year smoking history. The exclusion criteria were symptoms suggestive of lung cancer or a history of malignancy in the previous 5 years. The participants completed a questionnaire and underwent a chest CT scan at baseline and annually for 5 years. The management of positive screening results was determined using a defined algorithm: annual follow-up CT scan for nodules less than 5 mm; 6-month follow-up CT scan for nodules 5 to 7 mm; review by our multidisciplinary tumor board for nodules 8 to 12 mm; and biopsy for nodules greater than 12 mm. RESULTS: A total of 132 patients were recruited. Of the 132 patients, 61% had positive baseline CT findings and 22% had positive findings on the annual CT scans. Six cancers were detected. Of these 6 patients, 5 had stage I disease and underwent lobectomy, and 1 had stage IIIA disease and underwent induction chemotherapy and radiotherapy followed by lobectomy. All patients were alive and disease free at a mean follow-up of 41.7 ± 18.6 months. No biopsies were performed for benign lesions. Also, no cancers were missed when the protocol was followed. CONCLUSIONS: Screening with CT can be done effectively in an area endemic for histoplasmosis while minimizing benign biopsies.
 18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose-Positron Emission Tomography (FGD-PET) has been considered to have a major impact on the management of lung malignancies since the beginning of this century. Its value has been demonstrated by many publications, meta-analysis and European/American/Japanese recommendations. PET combined with computed tomography has provided useful information regarding the diagnosis and staging of lung cancer and allows for the delivery of adaptive radiotherapy. In its more common uses, PET has been shown to be cost-effective. With the widespread use of new radiotracers, PET will play an increasing role in the evaluation of response to treatment.
 Regulatory regions of the human genome can be modified through epigenetic processes during prenatal life to make an individual more likely to suffer chronic diseases when they reach adulthood. The modification of chromatin and DNA contributes to a larger well-documented process known as "programming" whereby stressors in the womb give rise to adult onset diseases, including cancer. It is now well known that death from ischemic heart disease is related to birth weight; the lower the birth weight, the higher the risk of death from cardiovascular disease as well as type 2 diabetes and osteoporosis. Recent epidemiological data link rapid growth in the womb to metabolic disease and obesity and also to breast and lung cancers. There is increasing evidence that "marked" regions of DNA can become "unmarked" under the influence of dietary nutrients. This gives hope for reversing propensities for cancers and other diseases that were acquired in the womb. For several cancers, the size and shape of the placenta are associated with a person's cardiovascular and cancer risks as are maternal body mass index and height. The features of placental growth and nutrient transport properties that lead to adult disease have been little studied. In conclusion, several cancers have their origins in the womb, including lung and breast cancer. More research is needed to determine the epigenetic processes that underlie the programming of these diseases.
 BACKGROUND: Diagnosis and follow-up of bone metastasis (BMet) in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients usually rely on symptoms and image studies. A serum marker of bone resorption may improve the quality of treatment in such patients. Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase 5b (TRACP5b) is a specific marker for osteoclasts and we proposed it can be used as a marker of BMet in NSCLC patients. METHODS: In November 2002 till August 2008 serum samples were obtained from 141 newly diagnosed stage IIIA, IIIB or IV NSCLC patients and 41 normal subjects. All patients received baseline bone scintinography examination and evaluation of clinical symptoms as a standard of BMet diagnosis. Patients were divided into 2 groups by having BMet (Group I, n=72) or not (Group II, n=69). An in-house immunoassay using a TRACP-specific monoclonal antibody, 14G6, was used to measure the serum TRACP5b activity at pH 6.1. RESULTS: The mean serum TRACP5b activities of Group I, Group II and normal subjects were 3.50±2.23 U/l, 2.09±0.72 U/l and 2.33±0.52 U/l, respectively. After adjusting for age, stage, gender, and histology in a generalized linear model, Group I has significantly higher TRACP5b activity than Group II (p＜0.001). The receiver operating characteristic analysis established a cutoff value of 2.551 U/l to identify BMet in NSCLC patients with a sensitivity of 63.9% and a specificity of 76.8%. TRACP5b activity declined in patients who responded to treatment (p=0.047), and elevated in patients who developed new BMet (p=0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Serum TRACP5b activity test is a potentially useful adjunct in diagnosing and monitoring BMet in NSCLC. Further study is warranted to establish its real value in diagnosis and monitoring of BMet in NSCLC patients.
 The pulmonary lymphatic vasculature plays a vital role in maintaining fluid homeostasis required for efficient gas exchange at capillary alveolar barriers and contributes to lung fluid clearance at birth. To further understanding of pulmonary lymphatic function at birth, lineage-tracing analysis of mouse lung was used. Lineage analysis confirmed that lymphatic endothelial cells (LEC) bud from extrapulmonary lymphatics and demonstrated that LEC migrate into developing lung along precise pathways. LEC cluster first in the primary bronchovascular region then along the secondary broncho-arterial regions and along veins. Small lymphatic vessels in distal lung develop from LEC that have migrated into lung mesenchyme from the extrapulmonary lymphatics. Finally, proximal and distal lymphatics remodel to form vessels with lumens in stereotypical locations. Loss of function analysis with lung-specific expression of a secreted form of the extracellular domain of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-3 (dnR3) caused significant embryonic pulmonary lymphatic hypoplasia with fourfold reduction in distal LEC. Lung-specific expression of dnR3 did not affect blood vascular development, overall lung organogenesis or lymphatic development in other organs. Neonatal mice with pulmonary lymphatic hypoplasia developed respiratory distress with significantly increased mortality. During the transition to air breathing, lymphatic hypoplasia adversely affected fetal lung fluid clearance as determined by wet/dry weight analysis and morphometric analysis of bronchovascular cuffing and mesenchymal thickening. Surfactant synthesis was unaffected. Together, these data demonstrate that lung lymphatics develop autonomously and that pulmonary lymphatic hypoplasia is detrimental to survival of the neonate due to impaired lung fluid clearance.
 Purpose The purpose of this study was to prospectively determine the diagnostic accuracy of diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) using MRI in the staging of thoracic lymph nodes in patients with lung cancer, and to compare the performance to that of PET/CT. Patients and Method 20 consecutive patients (pts) with histologically proven lung cancer were included in this study. In all pts FDG-PET/CT was routinely performed to stage lung carcinoma. Additionally, MRI (1.5T) was performed including native T1w, T1w post contrast medium, T2w, and DWI sequences. Regarding the N stage based on the results of the PET/CT there were 5 patients with N0, 3 patients with N1, 5 patients with N2 and 7 patients with N3. Image analysis was performed by two radiologists (R1 and R2), respectively. The reviewers had to chose between 1 (at least one lymph node within a station is malignant) or 0 (no lymph nodes suspicious for malignancy). First the T1 post contrast sequence was analyzed. In a second step the DWI sequence (b=800) was analyzed. Both steps were performed in a blinded fashion. Results MR imaging with or without DWI only agreed with the results of the PET/CT regarding the N stage in 80% of the patients-15% were understaged and 5% overstaged. There was excellent interobserver agreement; the N-staging result only differed in 1 patient for DWI, resulting in correlation coefficients of 0.98 for DWI and 1.0 for MRI. Compared to PET-CT MRI overstaged one and understaged 4 patients, while DWI overstaged one and understaged 3 patients. This resulted in correlation coefficients of 0.814 (R1 and R2) for MRI and 0.815 (R1) and 0.804 (R2) for DWI. Regarding the ADC values there were no significant differences between ipsilateral hilar (1.03mm(2)/s±0.13), subcarinal (0.96mm(2)/s±0.24), ipsilateral mediastinal (1.0mm(2)/s±0.18), contralateral mediastinal (0.93mm(2)/s±0.23) and supraclavicular (0.9mm(2)/s±0.23) lymph nodes. Conclusion Diffusion-weighted imaging does not show a clear advantage over conventional MR protocols in the N-staging of lung cancer. MRI with or without DWI shows a moderately correlation with PET/CT with a tendency for understaging.
 PURPOSE: To evaluate the dosimetric benefits of advanced radiotherapy techniques for craniospinal irradiation in cancer in children. METHODS AND MATERIALS: Craniospinal irradiation (CSI) using three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy (3D-CRT), tomotherapy (TOMO), and proton beam treatment (PBT) in the scattering mode was planned for each of 10 patients at our institution. Dosimetric benefits and organ-specific radiation-induced cancer risks were based on comparisons of dose-volume histograms (DVHs) and on the application of organ equivalent doses (OEDs), respectively. RESULTS: When we analyzed the organ-at-risk volumes that received 30%, 60%, and 90% of the prescribed dose (PD), we found that PBT was superior to TOMO and 3D-CRT. On average, the doses delivered by PBT to the esophagus, stomach, liver, lung, pancreas, and kidney were 19.4 Gy, 0.6 Gy, 0.3 Gy, 2.5 Gy, 0.2 Gy, and 2.2 Gy for the PD of 36 Gy, respectively, which were significantly lower than the doses delivered by TOMO (22.9 Gy, 4.5 Gy, 6.1 Gy, 4.0 Gy, 13.3 Gy, and 4.9 Gy, respectively) and 3D-CRT (34.6 Gy, 3.6 Gy, 8.0 Gy, 4.6 Gy, 22.9 Gy, and 4.3 Gy, respectively). Although the average doses delivered by PBT to the chest and abdomen were significantly lower than those of 3D-CRT or TOMO, these differences were reduced in the head-and-neck region. OED calculations showed that the risk of secondary cancers in organs such as the stomach, lungs, thyroid, and pancreas was much higher when 3D-CRT or TOMO was used than when PBT was used. CONCLUSIONS: Compared with photon techniques, PBT showed improvements in most dosimetric parameters for CSI patients, with lower OEDs to organs at risk.
 PURPOSE: To compare the quality-adjusted life expectancy and overall survival in patients with Stage I non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) treated with either stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) or surgery. METHODS AND MATERIALS: We constructed a Markov model to describe health states after either SBRT or lobectomy for Stage I NSCLC for a 5-year time frame. We report various treatment strategy survival outcomes stratified by age, sex, and pack-year history of smoking, and compared these with an external outcome prediction tool (Adjuvant! Online). RESULTS: Overall survival, cancer-specific survival, and other causes of death as predicted by our model correlated closely with those predicted by the external prediction tool. Overall survival at 5 years as predicted by baseline analysis of our model is in favor of surgery, with a benefit ranging from 2.2% to 3.0% for all cohorts. Mean quality-adjusted life expectancy ranged from 3.28 to 3.78 years after surgery and from 3.35 to 3.87 years for SBRT. The utility threshold for preferring SBRT over surgery was 0.90. Outcomes were sensitive to quality of life, the proportion of local and regional recurrences treated with standard vs. palliative treatments, and the surgery- and SBRT-related mortalities. CONCLUSIONS: The role of SBRT in the medically operable patient is yet to be defined. Our model indicates that SBRT may offer comparable overall survival and quality-adjusted life expectancy as compared with surgical resection. Well-powered prospective studies comparing surgery vs. SBRT in early-stage lung cancer are warranted to further investigate the relative survival, quality of life, and cost characteristics of both treatment paradigms.
 BACKGROUND: Preoperative concurrent chemoradiotherapy (CRT) is an accepted treatment for potentially resectable, locally advanced, non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We reviewed a decade of single institution experience with preoperative split-course CRT followed by surgical resection to evaluate survival and identify factors that may be helpful in predicting outcome. METHODS AND MATERIALS: All patients treated with preoperative split-course CRT and resection at Rush University Medical Center (RUMC) between January 1999 and December 2008 were retrospectively analyzed. Endpoints included overall survival (OS), progression-free survival (PFS), local-regional progression-free survival (LRPFS), and distant metastasis-free survival (DMFS). Patient and treatment related variables were assessed for correlation with outcomes. RESULTS: A total of 54 patients were analyzed, 76% Stage IIIA, 18% Stage IIIB, and 6% oligometastatic. The pathologic complete response (pCR) rate was 31.5%, and the absence of nodal metastases (pN0) was 64.8%. Median OS and 3-year actuarial survival were 44.6 months and 50%, respectively. Univariate analysis revealed initial stage (p < 0.01) and percent weight change during CRT (p < 0.01) significantly correlated with PFS/OS. On multivariate analysis initial stage (HR, 2.4; 95% CI, 1.18-4.90; p = 0.02) and percent weight change (HR, 0.79; 95% CI, 0.67-0.93; p < 0.01) maintained significance with respect to OS. There were no cases of Grade 3+ esophagitis, and there was a single case of Grade 3 febrile neutropenia. CONCLUSIONS: The strong correlation between weight change during CRT and OS/PFS suggests that this clinical parameter may be useful as a complementary source of predictive information in addition to accepted factors such as pathological response.
 PURPOSE: To evaluate whether complex radiotherapy (RT) planning was associated with improved outcomes in a cohort of elderly patients with unresected Stage I-II non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). METHODS AND MATERIALS: Using the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results registry linked to Medicare claims, we identified 1998 patients aged >65 years with histologically confirmed, unresected stage I-II NSCLC. Patients were classified into an intermediate or complex RT planning group using Medicare physician codes. To address potential selection bias, we used propensity score modeling. Survival of patients who received intermediate and complex simulation was compared using Cox regression models adjusting for propensity scores and in a stratified and matched analysis according to propensity scores. RESULTS: Overall, 25% of patients received complex RT planning. Complex RT planning was associated with better overall (hazard ratio 0.84; 95% confidence interval, 0.75-0.95) and lung cancer-specific (hazard ratio 0.81; 95% confidence interval, 0.71-0.93) survival after controlling for propensity scores. Similarly, stratified and matched analyses showed better overall and lung cancer-specific survival of patients treated with complex RT planning. CONCLUSIONS: The use of complex RT planning is associated with improved survival among elderly patients with unresected Stage I-II NSCLC. These findings should be validated in prospective randomized controlled trials.
 PURPOSE: Recent clinical trials and meta-analyses have shown that both CHART (continuous hyperfractionated accelerated radiation therapy) and induction chemotherapy offer a survival advantage over conventional radical radiotherapy for patients with inoperable non-small cell-lung cancer (NSCLC). This multicenter randomized controlled trial (INCH) was set up to assess the value of giving induction chemotherapy before CHART. METHODS AND MATERIALS: Patients with histologically confirmed, inoperable, Stage I-III NSCLC were randomized to induction chemotherapy (ICT) (three cycles of cisplatin-based chemotherapy followed by CHART) or CHART alone. RESULTS: Forty-six patients were randomized (23 in each treatment arm) from 9 UK centers. As a result of poor accrual, the trial was closed in December 2007. Twenty-eight patients were male, 28 had squamous cell histology, 34 were Stage IIIA or IIIB, and all baseline characteristics were well balanced between the two treatment arms. Seventeen (74%) of the 23 ICT patients completed the three cycles of chemotherapy. All 42 (22 CHART + 20 ICT) patients who received CHART completed the prescribed treatment. Median survival was 17 months in the CHART arm and 25 months in the ICT arm (hazard ratio of 0.60 [95% CI 0.31-1.16], p = 0.127). Grade 3 or 4 adverse events (mainly fatigue, dysphagia, breathlessness, and anorexia) were reported for 13 (57%) CHART and 13 (65%) ICT patients. CONCLUSIONS: This small randomized trial indicates that ICT followed by CHART is feasible and well tolerated. Despite closing early because of poor accrual, and so failing to show clear evidence of a survival benefit for the additional chemotherapy, the results suggest that CHART, and ICT before CHART, remain important options for the treatment of inoperable NSCLC and deserve further study.
 PURPOSE: Several accelerated partial breast irradiation (APBI) techniques are described in the literature, and apparently, the three-dimensional (3D)-conformal technique is being used increasingly. Nonetheless, the optimal radiation dose is not yet known. Here, we report feasibility and early toxicities of APBI delivering 40 Gy over 5 days, in a phase II trial. METHODS AND MATERIALS: From October 2007 to September 2008, 25 patients with pT1N0 cancer received 3D-conformal APBI. The prescribed radiation dose was 40 Gy in 4-Gy fractions given twice daily. This technique used two minitangents and an "en face" electron field. Toxicities were systematically assessed at 1, 2, and 6 months and then once every 6 months. RESULTS: The planning tumor volume for evaluation (PTV_EVAL) coverage was adequate: the mean dose to the PTV_EVAL was 41.8 Gy (range, 41-42.4 Gy). Mean doses to the ipsilateral lung and heart were 1.6 Gy (range, 1.0-2.3 Gy) and 1.2 Gy (range, 1.0-1.6 Gy), respectively. One and two months after completion of APBI, most patients had no or mild erythema (n = 16 patients at 1 month; n = 25 patients at 2 months); none of these patients developed moist desquamation. After a median follow-up of 12 months, only 1 patient had a significant moderate field contracture (grade 2). Other reported late toxicities were grade 1. CONCLUSIONS: 3D-conformal APBI (with two minitangents and an "en face" electron field) using a total dose of 40 Gy in 10 fractions twice daily over 5 days achieved appropriate PTV_EVAL coverage and offered significant sparing of normal tissue. Early tolerance was excellent.
 PURPOSE: Radiologic lung density changes are observed in more than 50% of patients after stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) for lung cancer. We studied the relationship between SBRT dose and posttreatment computed tomography (CT) density changes, a surrogate for lung injury. METHODS AND MATERIALS: The SBRT fractionation schemes used to treat Stage I lung cancer with RapidArc were three fractions of 18 Gy, five fractions of 11 Gy, or eight fractions of 7.5 Gy, prescribed at the 80% isodose. Follow-up CT scans performed at less than 6 months (n = 50) and between 6 and 9 months (n = 30) after SBRT were reviewed. Posttreatment scans were coregistered with baseline scans using a B-spline deformable registration algorithm. Voxel-Hounsfield unit histograms were created for doses between 0.5 and 50 Gy. Linear mixed effects models were used to assess the effects of SBRT dose on CT density, and the influence of possible confounders was tested. RESULTS: Increased CT density was associated with higher dose, increasing planning target volume size, and increasing time after SBRT (all p < 0.0001). Density increases were apparent in areas receiving >6 Gy, were most prominent in areas receiving >20 Gy, and seemed to plateau above 40 Gy. In regions receiving >36 Gy, the reduction in air-filled fraction of lung after treatment was up to 18%. No increase in CT density was observed in the contralateral lung receiving ≥3 Gy. CONCLUSIONS: A dose-response relationship exists for quantitative CT density changes after SBRT. A threshold of effect is seen at low doses, and a plateau at highest doses.
 BACKGROUND: Activation of nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor (Nrf2), which belongs to the basic leucine zipper transcription factor family, is a strategy for cancer chemopreventive phytochemicals. It is an important regulator of genes induced by oxidative stress, such as glutathione S-transferases, heme oxygenase-1 and peroxiredoxin 1, by activating the antioxidant response element (ARE). We hypothesized that (1) the citrus coumarin auraptene may suppress premalignant mammary lesions via activation of Nrf2/ARE, and (2) that Nrf2 knockout (KO) mice would be more susceptible to mammary carcinogenesis. METHODS: Premalignant lesions and mammary carcinomas were induced by medroxyprogesterone acetate and 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene treatment. The 10-week pre-malignant study was performed in which 8 groups of 10 each female wild-type (WT) and KO mice were fed either control diet or diets containing auraptene (500 ppm). A carcinogenesis study was also conducted in KO vs. WT mice (n=30-34). Comparisons between groups were evaluated using ANOVA and Kaplan-Meier Survival statistics, and the Mann-Whitney U-test. RESULTS: All mice treated with carcinogen exhibited premalignant lesions but there were no differences by genotype or diet. In the KO mice, there was a dramatic increase in mammary carcinoma growth rate, size, and weight. Although there was no difference in overall survival, the KO mice had significantly lower mammary tumor-free survival. Also, in the KO mammary carcinomas, the active forms of NF-kappaB and beta-catenin were increased about 2-fold whereas no differences in oxidized proteins were observed. Many other tumors were observed, including lymphomas. Interestingly, the incidences of lung adenomas in the KO mice were significantly higher than in the WT mice. CONCLUSIONS: We report, for the first time, that there was no apparent difference in the formation of premalignant lesions, but rather, the KO mice exhibited rapid, aggressive mammary carcinoma progression.
 BACKGROUND: A number of diagnostic tests are required for the detection and management of cancer. Most imaging modalities such as computerized tomography (CT) are anatomical. However, positron emission tomography (PET) is a functional diagnostic imaging technique using compounds labelled with positron-emitting radioisotopes to measure cell metabolism. It has been a useful tool in studying soft tissues such as the brain, cardiovascular system, and cancer. The aim of this systematic review is to critically summarize the health economic evidence of oncologic PET in the literature. METHODS: Eight electronic databases were searched from 2005 until February 2010 to identify economic evaluation studies not included in previous Health Technology Assessment (HTA) reports. Only full health economic evaluations in English, French, or German were considered for inclusion. Economic evaluations were appraised using published quality criteria for assessing the quality of decision-analytic models. Given the variety of methods used in the health economic evaluations, the economic evidence has been summarized in qualitative form. RESULTS: From this new search, 14 publications were identified that met the inclusion criteria. All publications were decision-analytic models and evaluated PET using Fluorodeoxyglucose F18 (FDG-PET). Eight publications were cost-effectiveness analyses; six were cost-utility analyses. The studies were from Australia, Belgium, Canada, France, Italy, Taiwan, Japan, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, and the United States. In the base case analyses of these studies, cost-effectiveness results ranged from dominated to dominant. The methodology of the economic evaluations was of varying quality. Cost-effectiveness was primarily influenced by the cost of PET, the specificity of PET, and the risk of malignancy. CONCLUSIONS: Owing to improved care and less exposure to ineffective treatments, personalized medicine using PET may be cost-effective. However, the strongest evidence for the cost-effectiveness of PET is still in the staging of non-small cell lung cancer. Management decisions relating to the assessment of treatment response or radiotherapy treatment planning require further research to show the impact of PET on patient management and its cost-effectiveness. Because of the potential for increased patient throughput and the possible greater accuracy, the cost-effectiveness of PET/CT may be superior to that of PET. Only four studies of the cost-effectiveness of PET/CT were found in this review, and this is clearly an area for future research.
 Targeted glycoproteomics represents an attractive approach for conducting peripheral blood based cancer biomarker discovery due to the well-known altered pattern of protein glycosylation in cancer and the reduced complexity of the resultant glycoproteome. Here we report its application to a set of pooled non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) case sera (9 adenocarcinoma and 6 squamous cell carcinoma pools from 54 patients) and matched controls pools, including 8 clinical control pools with computed tomography detected nodules but being non-malignant as determined by biopsy from 54 patients, and 8 matched healthy control pools from 106 cancer-free subjects. The goal of the study is to discover biomarkers which may enable improved early detection and diagnosis of lung cancer. Immunoaffinity subtraction was used to first deplete the top most abundant serum proteins; the remaining serum proteins were then subjected to hydrazide chemistry based glycoprotein capture and enrichment. Hydrazide resin in situ trypsin digestion was used to release non-glycosylated peptides. Formerly N-linked glycosylated peptides were released by peptide-N-glycosidase F (PNGase F) treatment and were subsequently analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). A MATLAB® based in-house tool was developed to facilitate retention time alignment across different LC-MS/MS runs, determination of precursor ion m/z values and elution profiles, and the integration of mass chromatograms based on determined parameters for identified peptides. A total of 38 glycopeptides from 22 different proteins were significantly differentially abundant across the case/control pools (P<0.01, Student's t test) and their abundances led to a near complete separation of case and control pools based on hierarchical clustering. The differential abundances of three of these candidate proteins were verified by commercially available ELISAs applied in the pools. Strong positive correlations between glycopeptide mass chromatograms and ELISA-measured protein abundance was observed for all of the selected glycoproteins.
 Cellular senescence is one of the important steps against tumor. This study was to observe the characteristics of boningmycin induced senescence of human tumor cells. MIT method and clone formation assay were used to detect the growth-inhibitory effect. Cellular senescence was detected with senescence-associated beta-galactosidase staining. Cell cycle distribution and accumulation of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) were analyzed with flow cytometry. Protein expression was detected by Western blotting. The results showed that the growth-inhibitory effect of boningmycin was obviously stronger on human oral epithelial carcinoma KB cells than that on non-small cell lung cancer A549 cells. Comparison to the similar action of doxorubicin, that boningmycin induced the features of cellular senescence in both cell lines, its due to the arrest at G2/M phase and an increase of ROS level. The molecular senescence marker P21 increased significantly after boningmycin treatment at a dosage of 0.1 micromol x L(-1), whereas a higher concentration of it induced apoptosis. The results indicated that cellular senescence induced by boningmycin was one of its mechanisms in tumor suppression.
 Despite broad variability in study populations, methodologies for CMV detection, and analytic methods used, multiple studies have documented frequent CMV infection in non-immunocompromised adults with critical illness due to a variety of causes. Higher rates of CMV infection in studies of seropositive patients suggest that reactivation of latent infection rather than primary infection is the main mechanism in this setting. Risk factors for CMV reactivation (other than seropositivity) have not been clearly defined and there does not appear to be a consistent association with severity of illness. Furthermore, CMV reactivation in this setting has been associated with important adverse clinical outcomes, including increased duration of mechanical ventilation, longer length of stay and all-cause mortality. There are several biologically plausible mechanisms that could link CMV reactivation with adverse outcomes, including: direct lung injury (CMV pneumonia), amplification of inflammation systemically and within the lung, or predisposition to other nosocomial infections, but clinical data in the ICU setting are limited. Further observational studies are unlikely to significantly advance our understanding of the role of CMV in critically ill patients. Given the significant impact of critical illness, limited current therapeutic options, the availability of generally well-tolerated antiviral options for CMV, and the clinical data supporting a possible pathogenic role for CMV, there is a strong rationale for a randomised controlled trial of CMV prevention as a novel means of improving the outcomes of critically ill patients. Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
 Inflammatory pseudotumor of the liver is a rare disorder that can histologically and radiologically resemble malignant neoplasms. The prognosis of the patients with hepatic inflammatory pseudotumor is usually good with conservative therapy. Most of the reported cases are diagnosed in the surgical resection specimens; only very few reported cases have been diagnosed by needle biopsy. We report three additional cases of inflammatory pseudotumor of the liver diagnosed by liver biopsy. Two of these cases were treated successfully with antibiotics. The other case, who was resistant to medical treatment, had coexisting neuroendocrine neoplasms of the rectum and the lung. Since her general condition did not allow an extensive surgery, the mass of the liver could not be resected and she died approximately five months after she was voluntarily discharged from the hospital. Many of the inflammatory pseudotumor of the liver are found to be associated with variable neoplasms, but to our knowledge, the latter case is the first case of inflammatory pseudotumor associated with a neuroendocrine tumor.
 Altered metabolism of cancer first highlighted by Otto Warburg has a long history. Although ignored for a considerable amount of time, it is now receiving substantial attention. We recently published results obtained with a combination of two drugs, lipoic acid and hydroxycitrate, targeting metabolic enzymes particularly affected in cancer: ATP citrate lyase and pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase. This treatment was as efficient as chemotherapy in the three mouse cancer models that were tested. In this work, we asked if our drug combination could be used in conjunction with standard cytotoxic chemotherapy, in particular cisplatin, to improve basic protocol efficacy. A combination of lipoic acid and hydroxycitrate was administered to mice implanted with syngeneic cancer cells, LL/2 lung carcinoma and MBT-2 bladder carcinoma, concommitantly with classical chemotherapy (cisplatin or methotrexate). We demonstrate that the triple combination lipoic acid + hydroxycitrate + cisplatin or methotrexate is more efficient than cisplatin or methotrexate used individually or the combination of lipoic acid and hydroxycitrate administered alone. Of particular note are the results obtained in the treatment of an 80 year-old female who presented with ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas accompanied by liver metastases. A treatment course using gemcitabine plus α-lipoic acid and hydroxycitrate gave highly promising results. The in vivo data, coupled with the case study results, suggest a possible advantage in using a treatment targeted at cancer metabolism in association with classical chemotherapy.
 Meningeal carcinomatosis is a diffuse infiltration of leptomeninges and sub arachnoid space by malignant cells metastasizing from systemic cancer. Primary bronchogenic carcinoma presenting as carcinomatous meningitis is a very rare occurrence in clinical practice, often occurring during the treatment course of the underlying malignancy. We present this rare presentation in a young non-smoker male.
 BACKGROUND: Lung cancer has been found to be the second commonest cancer according to a hospital-based data from Kashmir, India. However, no incidence studies are available. OBJECTIVE: To ascertain the incidence of lung cancer in Kashmir. MATERIALS AND METHODS: All newly histologically diagnosed cases of lung cancer seen in various hospital and private laboratories of the Kashmir valley were registered over a period of two years (January 1, 2004 to December 31, 2005). Also included were patients attending the various oncological service areas of the institute and those diagnosed from any other laboratory outside the state. The incidence rate was calculated using the January 2005 population as the reference population estimated using the census-based projected populations. RESULTS: Four hundred and sixty-two incident cases of lung cancer were seen during the study period. The crude incidence rate, age standardized (world) and truncated age adjusted (40-69 years, world) incidence rates for lung cancer per 100 000 population were 4.01, 6.48 and 15.28 respectively (males 6.55, 10.09 and 23.94 respectively and females 1.19, 2.14 and 4.65). The age adjusted rates for males in district Srinagar was 19.34 per 100 000. One hundred and fifty nine (69.8%) of the 221 had a history of Hukkah smoking. CONCLUSIONS: Even though Kashmir as a whole is a low incidence area for lung cancer (ASR of < 15), Srinagar district has the highest incidence of lung cancer among the males in Kashmir. The data presented is assumed to be the closest approximation to a population-based data registry and the geographical incidence maps of ICMR need appropriate updating.
 AIM: To evaluate the utility of fiberoptic bronchoscopy in order to find out the etiology in various lung conditions. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fiberoptic bronchoscopy was performed in 120 adult patients who had persistent opacities on chest radiography in the form of collapse, consolidation, hilar mass and cavity with proper antibiotic course of 1 to 3 months. Bronchoscopic aspirates, brushing and biopsy (as and when required) were taken. Patient with known lung cancer, sputum positive pulmonary TB, recent myocardial infarction, allergic diseases and blood dyscrasias were excluded. RESULTS: Fiberoptic bronchoscopy was diagnostic in 90 (75%) patients. Bacterial pneumonias were found in 32 (26.66%), malignancy in 28(23.33%), pulmonary TB in 20 (16.66%), fungal pneumonia in 6(5%) and foreign bodies in 4(3.33%) patients. In 30(25%) patients no specific diagnosis was made. CONCLUSION: We conclude that fiberoptic bronchoscopy was found to be extremely useful in finding specific etiology of various lung diseases.
 A 43-year-old woman had a pulmonary tumor detected by a computed tomographic (CT) scan during follow-up for breast cancer 15 years previously. The tumor showed a solid mass measuring 42 × 32 × 12 mm in extensive contact with the pleura of the apex of the left upper lobe. The edge of the tumor was relatively well-defined with an irregular shape, and a bubblelike area was seen within it. The longitudinal slice high-resolution CT findings showed a flat and thick mass, and its inferior border was distinct and horizontal. The pathological findings by a thoracoscopic lung biopsy showed a localized pulmonary fibrosis of the apex, a so-called pulmonary apical cap (PAC). With the recent advances in CT scan technology, the detection of PACs is very likely to increase, and they must be differentiated from superior sulcus tumors.
 Purpose: The significance of the postoperative serum C-reactive protein (CRP) level as a prognosis indicator was evaluated in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Patients and Methods: A total of 276 patients who had undergone a curative resection of NSCLC were retrospectively reviewed. Results: The overall and disease-specific survival rates in the postoperative CRP/high group (≥ 0.5 mg/dL at 30 days postoperation: n = 130) were significantly lower than those in the postoperative CRP/low group (< 0.5 mg/dL at 30 days postoperation: n = 146). However, based on a multivariate analysis, the postoperative CRP level was not among the unfavorable indicators regarding survival. The patients were divided into two groups, namely, the preoperative CRP/low group (n = 231) and the CRP/high group (n = 45). The proportion of the postoperative CRP/low group (60.2%) in the preoperative CRP/low group was significantly lower than that in the preoperative CRP/low group (15.6%; p <0.0001). No significant difference was observed in the disease-specific survival rates in the postoperative CRP/high group and the postoperative CRP/low group in either the preoperative high/group or low/group. Conclusions: The overall and disease-specific survival rates in the postoperative CRP/high group were significantly lower than that in the postoperative CRP/low group. This difference may be associated with the relationship between the pre- and postoperative CRP levels.
 Phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN) is a negative regulator of the phosphoinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT signaling pathway that controls cell cycle progression, growth and inhibition of apoptosis. Loss of PTEN protein expression has been associated with tumorigenesis, cancer progression and drug resistance, but conflicting results exist which may be due in part to difficulties inherent in PTEN immunohistochemistry (IHC). We sought a robust PTEN IHC assay. Human tumor cell lines with PTEN status verified by copy number analysis were formalin fixed and paraffin embedded for use as positive and negative controls. PTEN antibodies were optimized on tumor cell lines. Five optimized antibodies were analyzed on 10 molecularly characterized endometrial carcinoma samples. Four antibodies (CST, Millipore, Abcam, Novus) stained 3/10 positive and 7/10 negative, however, all but CST exhibited nonspecific nucleolar staining of negative controls. One antibody (Dako) stained 5/10 positive and 5/10 negative but with areas (≤10%) of positivity. The 4 samples predicted to be negative by sequencing were negative with the CST antibody, however, one was positive with Dako; as a result we chose the CST antibody for our assay. The assay was validated on an automated platform using 50 formalin fixed and paraffin embedded colon, lung, prostate and breast adenocarcinoma cases. Tumor cell lines served as external controls; endothelial cells and peripheral nerves served as internal positive controls. Dichotomous scoring achieved 100% concordance between three independent pathologists. This reproducible PTEN assay (PREZEON&!trade;) has been implemented in a CLIA certified laboratory.
 Multiple myeloma (MM) is a neoplasm of B cell lineage characterized by excessive proliferation of abnormal plasma cells which produce immunglobulins. If a monoclonal spike is not found in serum or urine but the patient has clinical findings and bone marrow plasma cell infiltration suggestive of MM, then the patient may have a rare subtype known as nonsecretory multiple myeloma (NSMM). Here, we describe a rare case of NSMM with plasmacytoma of bone who presented with severe hypercalcemia, acute kidney injury and a large thoracal mass on chest X-ray masquerading as lung cancer.
 Abstract Despite recent progress in the development of new molecularly targeted agents, the chemotherapy regimens considered standard at the end of the last century-that is, two-drug combinations consisting of either cisplatin or carboplatin plus a third-generation agent (docetaxel, paclitaxel, gemcitabine, or vinorelbine)-remain the primary treatment option for advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. Most recently, the existing standard of care has been amended to reflect the significant survival advantage of cisplatin-pemetrexed over cisplatin-gemcitabine as first-line treatment of nonsquamous NSCLC. The addition of a biological drug (bevacizumab, cetuximab) or the use of a single-agent epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor may further improve outcomes in selected patients. It has become increasingly clear, primarily through recent meta-analyses, that although the therapeutic equivalence of any combination of a platinum agent plus either gemcitabine, vinorelbine, docetaxel, or paclitaxel has been long accepted, each regimen has different side effects and therapeutic outcomes that allow clinicians to select the most appropriate treatment for chemotherapy-naïve patients with stage IIIB/IV NSCLC. In this review, we evaluate the available evidence and explore the role and importance of various modern chemotherapy regimens, with the aim of optimizing treatment selection and combination with biological agents. Emphasis is placed on the role of taxanes (docetaxel versus paclitaxel) in this changing landscape.
 Abstract Globally, lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality. Current chemotherapy combinations for the first-line treatment of advanced disease (stage IIIB with malignant pleural effusion/stage IV) and chemoradiotherapy regimens for the treatment of unresectable locally advanced disease (stage IIIA and IIIB without malignant pleural effusion) appear to have reached an efficacy plateau. The addition of new compounds including targeted agents to standard first-line cytotoxic doublets, administered concurrently and/or as maintenance therapy in patients who have not experienced disease progression after such treatment, has been shown to improve efficacy beyond this plateau in patients with advanced disease. However, to date, such approaches have been less successful in the treatment of patients with unresectable locally advanced stage III disease. The purpose of this review is to summarize the data from recent randomized phase III studies involving agents administered as maintenance or consolidation therapy in the treatment of unresectable stage III/IV non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). A possible alternative approach to the use of cytotoxic or molecularly targeted agents in this setting is the administration of therapeutic anticancer vaccines, which are designed to stimulate a host immunological response against the tumor. Current data in relation to the potential of vaccine therapy for NSCLC are therefore also reviewed, with a particular focus on belagenpumatucel-L and L-BLP25 vaccines, which are currently undergoing phase III evaluation as maintenance therapies in patients with unresectable stage III/IV NSCLC who have tumor control following first-line therapy.
 PURPOSE: The role of RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR) in antiviral defence mechanisms and in cellular differentiation, growth, and apoptosis is well known, but the role of PKR in human lung cancer remains poorly understood. To explore the role of PKR in human lung cancer, we evaluated PKR's expression in tissue microarray specimens from both non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and normal human bronchial epithelium tissue. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Tissue microarray samples (TMA-1) from 231 lung cancers were stained with PKR antibody and validated on TMA-2 from 224 lung cancers. Immunohistochemical expression score was quantified by three pathologists independently. Survival probability was computed by the Kaplan-Meier method. RESULTS: The NSCLC cells showed lower levels of PKR expression than normal bronchial epithelium cells did. We also found a significant association between lower levels of PKR expression and lymph node metastasis. We found that loss of PKR expression is correlated with a more aggressive behavior, and that a high PKR expression predicts a subgroup of patients with a favorable outcome. Univariate and multivariate Cox proportional hazards regression models showed that a lower level of PKR expression was significantly associated with shorter survival in NSCLC patients. We further validated and confirmed that PKR to be a powerful prognostic factor in TMA-2 lung cancer (HR=0.22, P<0.0001).CONCLUSIONS: Our findings first indicate that PKR expression is an independent prognostic variable in NSCLC patients.
 BACKGROUND: Twenty percent of all newly diagnosed patients with small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) are >75 years. Elderly patients may show more toxicity due to co-morbidity. We evaluated motives for adherence to treatment guidelines, completion of treatment and toxicity. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Population-based data from patients aged ≥75 years and diagnosed with SCLC in 1997-2004 in The Netherlands were used (368 limited disease and 577 extensive disease). Additional data on co-morbidity (Adult Co-morbidity Evaluation 27), World Health Organisation performance status (PS), treatment, motive for no chemotherapy, adaptations and underlying motive and grade 3 or 4 toxicity were gathered from the medical records. RESULTS: Forty-eight percent did not receive chemotherapy. The most common motives were refusal by the patient or family, short life expectancy or a combination of high age, co-morbidity and poor PS. Although only relatively fit elderly were selected for chemotherapy, 60%-75% developed serious toxicity, and two-thirds of all patients could not complete the full chemotherapy. CONCLUSIONS: We hypothesise that a better selection by proper geriatric assessments is needed to achieve a more favourable balance between benefit and harm.
 Lung cancer patients generally experience high levels of physical and psychological distress and decreased quality of life (QOL). Sense of coherence (SOC) has been conceptualized as a personality orientation reflecting the degree to which an individual perceives their world as comprehensible, manageable and meaningful. The present study investigated the associations of SOC with QOL in lung cancer. It also examined potential psychological mediators by which SOC may exert its influences on QOL. Fifty-six participants with non-small cell lung cancer were administered self-report assessments of SOC, QOL and psychological distress. Results revealed that SOC was positively associated with QOL and this relationship may be mediated by depressive symptoms. The current study supports the notion that SOC may be a protective factor with regard to psychological adjustment and QOL in cancer survivors.
 Mutagen challenge and DNA repair assays have been used in case-control studies for nearly three decades to assess human cancer risk. The findings still engender controversy because blood was drawn after cancer diagnosis so the results may be biased; a type called "reverse causation". We therefore used Epstein Barr virus-transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines established from prospectively collected peripheral blood samples to evaluate lung cancer risk in relation to three DNA repair assays: alkaline Comet assay, host cell reactivation assay with the mutagen benzo(a)pyrene diol epoxide, and the bleomycin mutagen sensitivity assay. Cases (n=117) were diagnosed with lung cancer between 0.3 and 6 years after blood collection and controls (n=117) were frequency matched on calendar year and age at blood collection, gender, and smoking history; all races were included. Case and control status was unknown to laboratory investigators. In unconditional logistic regression analyses, statistically significant increased lung cancer odds ratios (OR(adjusted)) were observed for bleomycin mutagen sensitivity as quartiles of chromatid breaks/cell (relative to the lowest quartile, OR=1.2, 95% confidence interval (CI): 0.5-2.5, OR=1.4, 95% CI: 0.7-3.1, OR=2.1, 95% CI: 1.0-4.4), respectively, p(trend) = 0.04). The magnitude of the association between the bleomycin assay and lung cancer risk was modest compared to those reported in previous lung cancer studies but was strengthened when we included only incident cases diagnosed more than a year after blood collection (p(trend) = 0.02), supporting the notion the assay may be a measure of cancer susceptibility. The Comet and host cell reactivation assays were unrelated to lung cancer risk.
 INTRODUCTION: Tyrosine phosphorylated signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (pStat3) is present in numerous cancers and is required for mediating tumorigenesis. Autocrine and paracrine interleukin (IL)-6 signaling is the principal mechanism by which Stat3 is persistently phosphorylated in epithelial tumors including breast, lung, colon and gastric cancer. The Ras oncogene mediates cellular transformation without evidence of pStat3 in cultured cells. Recently, however non-tyrosine phosphorylated Stat3 was shown to have a transcriptional activating function, a role in mitochondrial function and to mediate cell migration.. Here we examined the role of Stat3 in Ras mediated transformation. METHODS: Ha-rasV12 transformed mammary epithelial cells (MCF10A) cells were transduced with a Stat3shRNA, IL-6shRNA and/or treated with inhibitors of Janus kinases (JAKs) to examine the role of the IL-6 signaling pathway in Ras mediated invasion and tumorigenesis. RESULTS: Cellular migration, invasion, anchorage independent growth and tumorigenesis were largely abrogated in the Stat3-reduced cells compared to control cells. Analysis of MCF10A-Ras tumors revealed high levels of pStat3 and interleukin-6. Tumors derived from transgenic MMTV-K-Ras mice were also found to express pStat3 and IL-6. MCF10A-Ras cells, when grown in a three-dimensional Matrigel culture system revealed the appearance of the junctional protein E-Cadherin as a consequence of reducing Stat3 levels or inhibiting Stat3 activity. Decreasing IL-6 levels in the MCF10A-Ras cells abrogated tumorigenesis and reduced cell migration. By isolating Ras-expressing primary tumors and serially passaging these cells in two-dimensional culture led to a decrease in IL-6 and pStat3 levels with the reappearance of E-Cadherin. CONCLUSIONS: The cellular and environmental context can lead to differential IL-6/pStat3 signaling and a dependency on this cytokine and transcription factor for migration, invasion and tumorigenesis.
 OBJECTIVE: To compare the differences and characteristics in Chinese medicine (CM) and Western medicine therapeutic evaluation methods in the application of advanced non-small cell lung cancer. METHODS: A total of 200 cases of advanced non-small cell lung cancer from 3 subcenters were enrolled the study and assigned to two groups, 104 in the CM group treated with CM injection combined with treatment based on syndrome differentiation, 96 in the chemotherapy group treated with the international chemothearapy scheme, both the course of treatment was 6 weeks. Their short-term therapeutic effects were observed by the "clinic efficacy appraisal standard of therapy for advanced lung cancer with CM" simultaneously and by the follow-up Western medical solid tumor's effect evaluation criterion, including clinical symptoms, tumor body, Karnorfsky score, body weight and immune function evaluation. RESULTS: According to WHO solid tumor's effect evaluation criterion, the efficacy of the chemotherapy group was much better than that of the CM group (P < 0.01). While, according to the "clinic efficacy appraisal standard of therapy for advanced lung cancer with CM", the efficacy of the CM group was better than that of the chemotherapy group without statistical difference (P = 0.05), however, there was a very strong trend of appearing difference. There was difference inult o the results of the two evaluation methods. CONCLUSION: Compared with WHO solid tumor's effect evaluation criterion, "the clinic efficacy appraisal standard of therapy for advanced lung cancer with CM" can reflect more features and advantages of CM for cancer treatment, having value for further study.
 Splenic metastases are rare. Usually, they are part of a disseminated disease and located on the splenic capsule. Common sources are breast cancer, lung cancer and malignant melanoma. SoLitary splenic metastases are rare, usuaLLy located in the splenic parenchyma and metastasizing via the hematogenous route. Splenic metastases from ovarian carcinoma are usuaLly part of a disseminated disease, located on the splenic capsule and metastasize via the peritoneum. Splenic metastases from endometriaL carcinoma are usuaLLy solitary, Located in the splenic parenchyma and metastasize via the hematogenous route. Splenic metastases from cervical carcinoma are divided equally between metastases as part of a disseminated disease and soLitary metastases. Less than 100 cases of solitary splenic metastases have been reported with half of them being metastases from female genital tract malignancies: 30--ovarian carcinoma; 11--endometriaL carcinoma; 8--cervical carcinoma; and 1--tubal carcinoma. Few cases have been reported of splenic rupture because of metastases from choriocarcinoma. Splenic metastases as part of a disseminated disease are associated with poor prognosis, and splenectomy--apart from cases in which it might assist in achieving optimaL debulking--is not effective. Solitary splenic metastases represent a more moderate disease and the treatment of choice is splenectomy. SoLitary splenic metastases may be detected after an interval from the diagnosis of the primary disease. Hence, patients who had been treated for female genital tract malignancy, even if they are asymptomatic, need a long-term follow-up, including serial imaging studies of the spleen.
 BACKGROUND: Lobectomy using video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) still is a controversial operation despite its many observed benefits. The controversy may be due to difficulties performing the procedure. This study addresses a standardized anterior approach facilitating the operation. METHODS: This report describes 156 VATS lobectomies performed with a uniform anterior three-port technique. The surgeon and the assistant stand on the abdominal side of the patient, and the setup is independent of the lobe to be resected. RESULTS: From 2005 to 2007, 156 VATS lobectomies and 13 conversions (7.7%) were performed with an anterior three-port technique. No mortality occurred among the VATS lobectomies during a 30-day period. The major comorbidity rate was 78%. The comorbidities included former thoracic surgery (9%) or a history of another cancer (22%), indicating potentially difficult surgery and a nonselected population. The majority (92%) of the patients had lung cancer. The major postoperative problem was air leakage, which usually prolongs the tube time and the in-hospital stay, but a "no-touch fissure" technique significantly reduced the median tube time to 4 days and the postoperative hospital stay to 5 days. CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that VATS lobectomies can be performed using a standardized anterior approach with low rates of conversion and morbidity. A "no-touch fissure" technique lowers the postoperative tube time, the in-hospital stay, and the number of patients with prolonged air leakage. A uniform anterior approach facilitates VATS lobectomy and makes this advanced procedure more easily adaptable by many surgeons familiar with an open anterior approach. The findings show that VATS lobectomy can be performed safely for a large proportion of lung cancer patients.
 The present study reports a new three-dimensional (3D) microfluidic platform capable of rapid isolation and detection of cancer cells from a large sample volume (e.g.∼1 mL) by utilizing magnetic microbead-based technologies. Several modules, including a 3D microfluidic incubator for the magnetic beads to capture cancer cells, a microfluidic control module for sample transportation and a nucleic acid amplification module for genetic identification, are integrated into this microsystem. With the incorporation of surface-modified magnetic beads, target cancer cells can be specifically recognized and conjugated onto the surface of the antibody-coated magnetic microbeads by utilizing a swirling effect generated by the new 3D microfluidic incubator, followed by isolating and purifying the magnetic complexes via the incorporation of an external magnet and a microfluidic control module, which washes away any unbound waste solution. Experimental results show that over 90% of the target cancer cells can be isolated from a large volume of bio-samples within 10 min in the 3D microfluidic incubator. In addition, the expressed genes associated with ovarian and lung cancer cells can also be successfully amplified by using the on-chip nucleic acid amplification module. More importantly, the detection limit of the developed system is found to be 5 × 10(1) cells mL(-1) for the target cancer cells, indicating that this proposed microfluidic system may be adapted for clinical use for the early detection of cancer cells. Consequently, the proposed 3D microfluidic system incorporated with immunomagnetic beads may provide a promising automated platform for the rapid isolation and detection of cancer cells with a high sensitivity.
 This study aims at evaluating the impact of tissue heterogeneity corrections on dosimetry of stereotactic body radiation therapy treatment plans. Four-dimensional computed tomography data from 15 low stage non-small cell lung cancer patients was used. Treatment planning and dose calculations were done using pencil beam convolution algorithm of Varian Eclipse system with Modified Batho Power Law for tissue heterogeneity. Patient plans were generated with 6 MV co-planar non-opposing four to six field beams optimized with tissue heterogeneity corrections to deliver a prescribed dose of 60 Gy in three fractions to at least 95% of the planning target volume, keeping spinal cord dose <10 Gy. The same plans were then regenerated without heterogeneity correction by recalculating previously optimized treatment plans keeping identical beam arrangements, field fluences and monitor units. Compared with heterogeneity corrected plans, the non-corrected plans had lower average minimum, mean, and maximum tumor doses by 13%, 8%, and 6% respectively. The results indicate that tissue heterogeneity is an important determinant of dosimetric optimization of SBRT plans.
 Positron emission tomography (PET) and more recently PET/computed tomography (CT) scanning represent major advances in the imaging of lung cancer and have an especially high impact on the management of patients who are candidates for potentially curative or "radical" radiotherapy (RT). This article reviews the current status of PET and PET/CT for staging patients before RT and considers the use of PET and PET/CT images for target volume definition. The relevant literature on the use of PET for staging lung cancer is reviewed and placed in the context of patients who are candidates for RT. Research that specifically considers the use of PET for RT planning is considered critically and some promising areas for future research are discussed. The available literature is almost exclusively devoted to non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with few relevant studies of small cell lung cancer (SCLC). The primary PET radiopharmaceutical shown to have value for staging and RT planning is 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). In prospective studies where PET imaging was used to stage radical RT candidates, 25-30% of patients were excluded from radical therapy because of PET detected advanced disease. In all studies where "PET-assisted" and conventional target or treatment volumes were compared, there were major differences between PET and conventional volumes. Because PET-assisted staging is proven to be significantly more accurate than conventional staging and because all studies show major differences between PET-assisted and conventional treatment volumes in NSCLC, routine use of PET/CT for RT planning is recommended.
 Vinflunine (VFL) is the first bifluorinated tubulin-targeted agent obtained through a semi synthetic process using superacidic chemistry. Pharmacologic models evidenced a high degree of activity from several cancer lines. The intravenous formulation of VFL (Javlor, Pierre Fabre Medicament, Boulogne, France) is registered for bladder cancer and is undergoing Phase III trials for nonsmall cell lung and breast cancer. To support most of the pharmacokinetic studies in humans, a sensitive high-performance liquid chromatography bioanalytical method coupled with ultraviolet detection was developed and validated for the simultaneous quantification of VFL and its active metabolite 4-O-deacetylvinflunine. The two compounds, together with 17-bromovinorelbine, used as an internal standard, were extracted from blood (1 mL) by a liquid-liquid process under basic conditions using diethyl ether. The organic phase was then back-extracted with HCl 0.1 mol/L. Analysis was performed through a cyano column and detection was set at 268 nm. Total analysis run time was less than 15 minutes. The assay was sensitive for the two compounds to at least 2 ng/mL and calibration curves were linear up to 200 ng/mL. The between-run imprecision and the mean inaccuracy were lower than 7% and 8.3%, respectively. Blood samples were stable when stored at -70°C over 24 months. The long-term reproducibility and the suitability of this analytical method were demonstrated through the analysis of about 6000 biologic samples during the clinical development of intravenous VFL. This method is adequately sensitive to monitor the blood concentrations observed at the recommended dose defined in a clinical setting.
 Various anti-inflammatory agents have been used to treat acute or chronic lung injury-induced pulmonary fibrosis. However, the efficacy of the currently available treatments is disappointing and new therapies are urgently needed. In the current study, we investigated the effect of a novel α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (α-MSH) analogue, STY39, on bleomycin-induced pulmonary inflammation and fibrosis in mice. C57BL/6 mice received an intratracheal injection of bleomycin prior to being treated with STY39 (0.625, 1.25 or 2.5 mg/kg, i.p.) once a day for 14 consecutive days. Various parameters, reflecting the inflammatory reaction, metabolism of extracellular matrix, myofibroblast proliferation and degree of fibrosis in the lung, were evaluated. We found that STY39 significantly improved the survival of mice with lethal bleomycin-induced lung injury, limited body weight loss and the increase in the lung index, reduced the mRNA expression of Type I and type? procollagen and the production of hydroxyproline in the lung, diminished myofibroblast proliferation, and ultimately reduced bleomycin-induced lung damage. Further investigation revealed that, in a dose-dependent manner, STY39 treatment inhibited leukocyte migration into the lung, reduced the production of TNF-α, IL-6, macrophage-inflammatory protein-2 (MIP-2) and TGF-β1 in the lung, and altered the ratio of MMP-1 to TIMP-1. These findings suggest that STY39 attenuates bleomycin-induced experimental pulmonary fibrosis by limiting the inflammatory reaction through the inhibition of pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrosis cytokines, and by accelerating the metabolism of extracellular matrix. Therefore, STY39 may be an effective therapy for preventing pulmonary fibrosis.
 PURPOSE: Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors Version 1.1 (RECIST 1.1) has added positron emission tomography (PET) as an optional complement for the detection of new lesions. In this study, we evaluate the utility of fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-PET in the identification of new lesions and progressive disease not recognized on computed tomography (CT) in patients with nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) undergoing therapy. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Seventy patients (30 female, 40 male; mean age 67±14 years, range, 39-94 years) with NSCLC underwent FDG-PET before and after chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy, whereas 69 patients underwent CT imaging. Overall (OS) and progression-free survivals (PFS) were calculated for RECIST 1.1 with CT alone, RECIST 1.1 with PET for the identification of new lesions, visual PET, and semiquantitative PET using a change in standardized uptake value ranging from -15 to -50%. RESULTS: PET identified new lesions in 26 patients, resulting in 10 patients (14.5%) being upgraded to progressive disease. The combination of CT and PET for the detection of new lesions improved the prediction of survival (OS: P=0.0491 for all stages and P=0.0033 for stage IV; PFS: P=0.0045 for stage IV) compared with CT imaging alone (OS: P=0.1362 for all stages and P=0.1625 for stage IV; PFS: P=0.0632 for stage IV). Furthermore, a change in standardized uptake value of -35% was the most discriminative for the prediction of survival for the semiquantitative PET approach (OS: P=0.0393 for all stages, P=0.0051 for stage IV; PFS: P=0.0092 for stage IV) and more discriminative than the visual PET approach (OS: P=0.2699 for all stages, P=0.0105 for stage IV; PFS: P=0.014 for stage IV). CONCLUSION: FDG-PET is helpful in identifying new lesions in NSCLC patients, resulting in the improved assessment of therapy response with CT imaging combined with FDG-PET compared with CT imaging alone. Although RECIST 1.1 includes FDG-PET only as an optional adjunct, we recommend the implementation of PET imaging in the assessment of therapy response.
 Zoledronic acid (ZOL) was shown earlier to prolong survival in animal models of lung cancer. The aim of this study was to examine whether alteration of intracellular cyclins, cyclin-dependent kinases, cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, retinoblastoma, and Ras protein expression and E2F localization are among the possible antilung cancer mechanisms driven by ZOL. Furthermore, we used geranylgeraniol to test whether the mevalonate pathway is involved in the antitumor effects of ZOL against lung cancer. Line-1 cells, a murine lung adenocarcinoma cell line, were examined. ZOL significantly slowed the growth of these cells both in vitro and in vivo. The ZOL-treated cells typically arrested at the S/G2/M phase of the cell cycle, accompanied by increased intracellular levels of cyclin A, B1, and CDC2 and decreased levels of cyclin D, p21, p27, phosphorylated retinoblastoma, and Ras. In addition, ZOL affected the distribution of E2F. When geranylgeraniol was added to the ZOL-treated cells, either in vitro or in vivo, tumor growth, cell-cycle progression, the expression of certain cyclins, and cyclin-related regulatory proteins were partially returned to that of untreated controls. Therefore, ZOL elicits cell-cycle prolongation that seems to be associated with alterations in the levels of certain cyclins and cyclin-related regulatory proteins. Furthermore, the mevalonate pathway regulates ZOL-induced murine lung cancer inhibition both in vitro and in vivo.
 Background: To evaluate the activity and tolerance of gemcitabine (GEM) in combination with vinorelbine (VRL) in pretreated patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Patients and Methods: Fifteen patients with advanced NSCLC who had disease progression after a cisplatin- or taxane-based front-line regimen were enrolled into a 2-stage design trial and were treated with VRL 30 mg/m(2) i.v. for 10 min followed by GEM 1,200 mg/m(2) i.v. for 30 min on days 1 and 15 of each 28-day cycle. Chemotherapy was given for 6 cycles unless disease progression or unacceptable toxicity was seen. The patients' median age was 64 years and the performance status (WHO) was 0 (n = 7), 1 (n = 5), and 2 (n = 3). The treatment was second line for 10 (67%) and third line or more for 5 (33%) patients. Results: No complete or partial responses were observed. Stable disease was seen in 4 (27%) patients and progressive disease in 11 (73%). The median time to tumor progression was 3 months (range 1-12) and the median survival was 4 months (range 2-31). Severe myelotoxicity was infrequent. Grade 2 neutropenia was observed in 2 (13%) patients, grade 2 thrombocytopenia in 1 (7%), and grade 2 anemia in 3 (20%). Nonhematologic toxicities were very mild and easily manageable. Conclusion: The GEM plus VRL combination at the present doses and schedule is a safe but ineffective regimen; therefore, it is not recommended as second-line treatment in patients with advanced NSCLC.
 Risks of secondary solid cancers among allogeneic hematopoietic-cell transplant (HCT) recipients who receive conditioning without total-body irradiation are not well known. We evaluated the incidence and risk-factors for solid cancers after HCT using myeloablative busulfan-cyclophosphamide (Bu-Cy) conditioning in 4,318 recipients of first allogeneic HCT for acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in first complete remission (N=1,742) and chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) in first chronic phase (N=2,576). Our cohort represented 22,041 person-years at risk. Sixty-six solid cancers were reported at a median of 6-years after HCT. The cumulative-incidence of solid cancers at 5- and 10-years after HCT was 0.6% and 1.2% among AML and 0.9% and 2.4% among CML patients. In comparison to general population incidence rates, HCT recipients had 1.4 times higher than expected rate of invasive solid cancers (95% CI, 1.08-1.79, P=0.01). Significantly elevated risks were observed for tumors of the oral cavity, esophagus, lung, soft tissue and brain. Chronic graft-versus-host disease was an independent risk-factor for all solid cancers, and especially cancers of the oral cavity. Recipients of allogeneic HCT using Bu-Cy conditioning are at risk for developing solid cancers. Their incidence continues to increase with time since HCT and life-long cancer surveillance is warranted in this population.
 When oncologists encounter patients with pulmonary pleomorphic carcinoma, most cases have recurrent disease after surgery or metastatic disease. Previous studies have suggested that patients with pleomorphic carcinoma have extremely poor responses to chemotherapy regimens commonly used for non-small cell lung cancer and have a dismal prognosis. This report describes two consecutive patients with platinum-refractory pulmonary pleomorphic carcinoma who received doxorubicin, ifosfamide plus dacarbazine chemotherapy. Both patients showed dramatic responses to this combination chemotherapy and the treatment effect was sustained for 7 and 9 months, respectively. Our report strongly suggests that the treatment approaches to patients with pulmonary pleomorphic carcinoma should differ from the approaches to patients with other common types of non-small cell lung cancer. Doxorubicin, ifosfamide plus dacarbazine chemotherapy may have an important role in the treatment of patients with pulmonary pleomorphic carcinoma.
 The development of molecular markers is crucial for improving therapy in advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Here, we review perspectives of biomarker-driven personalized therapy in NSCLC, with particular reference to the detection of EML4-ALK gene rearrangements. Different molecular assays, validation, and clinical application to different types of tissue specimens are discussed. Clin Cancer Res; 16(20); 4909-11. ©2010 AACR.
 PURPOSE: Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) fusion genes represent novel oncogenes for non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC). Several ALK inhibitors have been developed, and are now being evaluated in ALK-positive NSCLC. The feasibility of detecting ALK fusion genes in samples obtained by endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration (EBUS-TBNA) was determined. The clinicopathologic characteristics of ALK-positive lung cancer were also analyzed. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: From April 2008 to July 2009, NSCLC cases with hilar/mediastinal lymph node metastases detected by EBUS-TBNA were enrolled. Positive expression of ALK fusion protein was determined using immunohistochemistry, and ALK gene rearrangements were further examined to verify the translocation between ALK and partner genes using fluorescent in situ hybridization and reverse transcription-PCR. Direct sequencing of PCR products was performed to identify ALK fusion variants. RESULTS: One hundred and nine cases were eligible for the analysis using re-sliced samples. Screening of these specimens with immunohistochemistry revealed ALK positivity in seven cases (6.4%), all of which possessed echinoderm microtubule-associated protein-like 4-ALK fusion genes as detected by fluorescent in situ hybridization and reverse transcription-PCR. All ALK-positive cases had an adenocarcinoma histology and possessed no EGFR mutations. Compared with ALK-negative cases, ALK-positive cases were more likely to have smaller primary tumors (P < 0.05), to occur at a younger age (<60 years; P < 0.05), and to occur in never/light smokers (smoking index < 400; P < 0.01). Mucin production was frequently observed in ALK-positive adenocarcinomas (29.4%; P < 0.01). CONCLUSIONS: EBUS-TBNA is a practical and feasible method for obtaining tissue from mediastinal and hilar lymph nodes that can be subjected to multimodal analysis of ALK fusion genes in NSCLC. Clin Cancer Res; 16(20); 4938-45. ©2010 AACR.
 Butyrate, a short chain fatty acid (SCFA), is a final product of bacterial fermentation of dietary fibres in colon and is the main energy source for colonocytes, though tumour cells are not able to metabolise it. As histone deacetylase inhibitor, butyrate controls cell proliferation and apoptosis; butyrate and butyrate-derived drugs are used in cancer therapy with varying success. Here we show that aggressive tumour cells that retain the capacity of metabolising butyrate may be positively selected. We used human colon cancer cells, which are butyrate resistant and able to fully metabolise butyrate. Inoculation of butyrate pre-selected cells, resulted in sub-cutaneous tumours that grew faster and were more angiogenic than those induced by untreated cells. Similarly, butyrate pre-selected cells show a significant increase in the homing to the lung after intravenous injection. Butyrate regulated the expression of VEGF and its receptor KDR at the transcriptional level, which may involve FoxM1, resulting in the generation of a functional VEGF:KDR autocrine growth loop. Cells selected by chronic exposure to butyrate express more MMP2, MMP9, α2 and α3 integrins, and express less E-cadherin a marker for epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). Orthotopic model of colon cancer, showed that cells pre-selected by butyrate are able to colonise the animals locally and at distant organs whereas control cells only generate a local tumour in the cecum. Our data shows that a butyrate-rich microenvironment may act to select tumour cells that are able to metabolise butyrate and are also phenotypically more aggressive.
 The present Letter identified 2'-hydroxy-2,3,4',6'-tetramethoxychalcone (HTMC) as a potent in vitro cytotoxic agent with selective activity against cell lines derived from human lung cancer. In A549 lung adenocarcinoma cells, HTMC caused G1 phase cell-cycle arrest. HTMC treatment also led to an inhibition of cell-cycle regulatory proteins phosphorylation of cdc2 (Tyr(15) and Tyr(161)) and Rb (Ser(795) and Ser(807/811)), which was accompanied by the accumulation of tumor suppresser genes p53 and p21. In addition, in vivo data demonstrated that HTMC act as a tumor growth suppressing agent.
 p73 possesses an extrinsic P1 promoter and an intrinsic P2 promoter controlling the expression of the pro-apoptotic TAp73 isoforms and the anti-apoptotic ΔΝp73 isoforms respectively. In this study, we investigated the DNA methylation status of both promoters as a means of epigenetic transcriptional control of their corresponding isoforms in 102 primary non-small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLCs). We demonstrated that while P1 hypermethylation-associated reduction of TAp73 mRNA levels is relatively infrequent, the P2 hypomethylation-associated over-expression of ΔΝp73 mRNA is a frequent event, particularly among squamous cell carcinomas. P2 hypomethylation strongly correlated with LINE-1 element hypomethylation, indicating that ΔΝp73 over-expression may be a passive consequence of global DNA hypomethylation.
 The steroid hormone receptors (SHRs) are ligand-dependent intracellular transcription factors that are known to influence the development and growth of many human cancers. SHRs pass signals from a steroid/hormone to the target genes by interacting with specific response element DNA sequences and various coregulatory proteins that consists of activators and/or corepressors. Disruptions in physiological functions of SHRs leads to several types of malignancies such as breast cancer, leukemia and lymphoma, prostate cancer, ovarian cancer, and lung cancer among others. Steroids/hormones/SHRs and their coregulators have opened up a unique window for novel steroid-based targeted therapies for cancer. Thus, dysregulation of SHR signaling in cancers compared with normal tissues can be exploited to target drugs that prevent and treat human cancers. In recent years, hormonal therapy has made a major contribution to the treatment of several cancers including reduced recurrence rates and longer survival rates. Development of various steroid receptor modulators and their potential therapeutic efficacies has provided us a great opportunity to effectively manage diseases like cancer in future. In this review article, we have summarized up-to-date knowledge of the role of SHRs in the development and progression of cancers, and potential endocrine-based therapeutic approaches to tackle these diseases.
 A wide variety of new bi(hetero)aryl derivatives of the thieno[3,2-b]pyridine skeleton was obtained in high to excellent yields (65-91%) by Suzuki-Miyaura cross-coupling of the methyl 3-amino-6-bromothieno[3,2-b]pyridine-2-carboxylate, recently reported by us, with aryl or heteroaryl pinacolboranes or potassium trifluoroborates. The coupling products obtained were evaluated for their growth inhibitory effect on three human tumor cell lines, representing different tumor models, MCF-7 (breast adenocarcinoma), A375-C5 (melanoma) and NCI-H460 (non-small cell lung cancer). Some of the compounds showed an interesting activity against the tested cell lines, with GI(50) values in the μM range, and it was possible to establish some structure-activity relationships (SARs). Several compounds presented GI(50) values below 15 μM, particularly a bithiophene and an o-aniline thienopyridine derivative. The first presented selectivity for MCF-7 and NCI-H460 cell lines, with very low GI(50) values (0.7-1.0 μM), while the latter was active against the three cell lines tested in this study, also presenting very low GI(50) values (2.5-4.2 μM). The effect of these two compounds on cell cycle progression was analyzed in the NCI-H460 cell line. Results showed that both compounds interfered with the normal cell cycle distribution.
 BACKGROUND: EGF receptor variant III (EGFRvIII) is the most common variant of the EGF receptor observed in human tumors.It results from the in frame deletion of exons 2-7 and the generation of a novel glycine residue at the junction of exons 1 and 8. This novel juxtaposition of amino acids within the extra-cellular domain of the EGF receptor creates a tumor specific and immunogenic epitope. EGFRvIII expression has been seen in many tumor types including glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), breast adenocarcinoma, non-small cell lung carcinoma, ovarian adenocarcinoma and prostate cancer, but has been rarely observed in normal tissue. Because this variant is tumor specific and highly immunogenic, it can be used for both a diagnostic marker as well as a target for immunotherapy. Unfortunately many of the monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies directed against EGFRvIII have cross reactivity to wild type EGFR or other non-specific proteins. Furthermore, a monoclonal antibody to EGFRvIII is not readily available to the scientific community. RESULTS: In this study, we have developed a recombinant antibody that is specific for EGFRvIII, has little cross reactivity for the wild type receptor, and which can be easily produced.We initially designed a recombinant antibody with two anti-EGFRvIII single chain Fv's linked together and a human IgG1 Fc component.To enhance the specificity of this antibody for EGFRvIII,we mutated tyrosine H59 of the CDRH2 domain and tyrosine H105 of the CDRH3 domain to phenylalanine for both the anti-EGFRvIII sequence inserts.This mutated recombinant antibody, called RAbDMvIII, specifically detects EGFRvIII expression in EGFRvIII expressing cell lines as well as in EGFRvIII expressing GBM primary tissue by western blot, immunohistochemistry (IHC)and immunofluorescence (IF) and FACS analysis. It does not recognize wild type EGFR in any of these assays.The affinity of this antibody for EGFRvIII peptide is 1.7 x 107 M-1 as determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). CONCLUSION: This recombinant antibody thus holds great potential to be used as a research reagent and diagnostic tool in research laboratories and clinics because of its high quality, easy viability and unique versatility. This antibody is also a strong candidate to be investigated for further in vivo therapeutic studies.
 BACKGROUND: Cough is a common and distressing symptom in lung cancer patients. The clinical management of cough in lung cancer patients is suboptimal with limited high quality research evidence available. The aim of the present paper is to present a clinical guideline developed in the UK through scrutiny of the literature and expert opinion, in order to aid decision making in clinicians and highlight good practice. METHODS: Two systematic reviews, one focusing on the management of cough in respiratory illness and one Cochrane review specifically on cancer, were conducted. Also, data from reviews, phase II trials and case studies were synthesized. A panel of experts in the field was also convened in an expert consensus meeting to make sense of the data and make clinical propositions. RESULTS: A pyramid of cough management was developed, starting with the treatment of reversible causes of cough/specific pathology. Initial cough management should focus on peripherally acting and intermittent treatment; more resistant symptoms require the addition of (or replacement by) centrally acting and continuous treatment. The pyramid for the symptomatic management starts from the simpler and most practical regimens (demulcents, simple linctus) to weak opioids to morphine and methadone before considering less well-researched and experimental approaches. CONCLUSION: The clinical guidelines presented aim to provide a sensible clinical approach to the management of cough in lung cancer. High quality research in this field is urgently required to provide more evidence-based recommendations.
 BACKGROUND: We have compared mutation analysis by DNA sequencing and Amplification Refractory Mutation System(TM) (ARMS) for their ability to detect mutations in clinical biopsy specimens. METHODS: We have evaluated five real-time ARMS assays: BRAF 1799T>A, [this includes V600E and V600K] and NRAS 182A>G [Q61R] and 181C>A [Q61K] in melanoma, EGFR 2573T>G [L858R], 2235-2249del15 [E746-A750del] in non-small-cell lung cancer, and compared the results to DNA sequencing of the mutation 'hot-spots' in these genes in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumour (FF-PET) DNA. RESULTS: The ARMS assays maximised the number of samples that could be analysed when both the quality and quantity of DNA was low, and improved both the sensitivity and speed of analysis compared with sequencing. ARMS was more robust with fewer reaction failures compared with sequencing and was more sensitive as it was able to detect functional mutations that were not detected by DNA sequencing. DNA sequencing was able to detect a small number of lower frequency recurrent mutations across the exons screened that were not interrogated using the specific ARMS assays in these studies. CONCLUSIONS: ARMS was more sensitive and robust at detecting defined somatic mutations than DNA sequencing on clinical samples where the predominant sample type was FF-PET.
 The article provides an overview on the diagnosis and pathogenesis of paraneoplastic neurological disorders (PNDs), and subsequently the current therapeutic strategies in these patients. PNDs are nervous system dysfunctions in cancer patients, which are not due to a local effect of the tumor or its metastases. Most of these clinically defined syndromes in adults are associated with lung cancer, especially small-cell lung cancer, lymphoma and gynecological tumors. In a part of the PND, an overlapping of different clinical syndromes can be observed. Highly specific autoantibodies directed against onconeuronal antigens led to the current hypothesis of an autoimmune pathophysiology. Whereas the most central nervous PNDs are more T-cell-mediated, limbic encephalitis can be caused by pathogenic receptor autoantibodies. The PND of the neuromuscular junction and paraneoplastic autonomic neuropathy are mainly associated with receptor or ion channel autoantibodies. The childhood opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome and the PNDs associated with receptor/ion channel autoantibodies often respond to immunosuppressive therapies, plasmapheresis and intravenous immunoglobulins. By contrast, most CNS PNDs associated with defined antineuronal antibodies directed against intracellular antigens only stabilize after tumor treatment.
 Extracts of green tea and green tea polyphenols have exhibited inhibitory effects against the formation and development of tumors at different organ sites in animals. These include animal models for skin, lung, oral cavity, esophagus, stomach, intestine, colon, liver, pancreas, bladder, mammary gland, and prostate cancers. In addition to suppressing cell proliferation, promoting apoptosis, and modulating signaling transduction, green tea polyphenols, especially (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate, also inhibit cell invasion, angiogenesis, and metastasis. This article reviews data on the cancer preventive activities of green tea polyphenols, possible mechanisms involved, and the relationship between green tea consumption and human cancer risk.
 Curcumin (diferuloylmethane), the yellow pigment in Indian saffron (Curcuma longa; also called turmeric, haldi, or haridara in the East and curry powder in the West), has been consumed by people for centuries as a dietary component and for a variety of proinflammatory ailments. Extensive research within the last decade in cell culture and in rodents has revealed that curcumin can sensitize tumors to different chemotherapeutic agents including doxorubicin, 5-FU, paclitaxel, vincristine, melphalan, butyrate, cisplatin, celecoxib, vinorelbine, gemcitabine, oxaliplatin, etoposide, sulfinosine, thalidomide, and bortezomib. Chemosensitization has been observed in cancers of the breast, colon, pancreas, gastric, liver, blood, lung, prostate, bladder, cervix, ovary, head and neck, and brain and in multiple myeloma, leukemia, and lymphoma. Similar studies have also revealed that this agent can sensitize a variety of tumors to gamma radiation including glioma, neuroblastoma, cervical carcinoma, epidermal carcinoma, prostate cancer, and colon cancer. How curcumin acts as a chemosensitizer and radiosensitizer has also been studied extensively. For example, it downregulates various growth regulatory pathways and specific genetic targets including genes for NF-κB, STAT3, COX2, Akt, antiapoptotic proteins, growth factor receptors, and multidrug-resistance proteins. Although it acts as a chemosensitizer and radiosensitizer for tumors in some cases, curcumin has also been shown to protect normal organs such as liver, kidney, oral mucosa, and heart from chemotherapy and radiotherapy-induced toxicity. The protective effects of curcumin appear to be mediated through its ability to induce the activation of NRF2 and induce the expression of antioxidant enzymes (e.g., hemeoxygenase-1, glutathione peroxidase, modulatory subunit of gamma-glutamyl-cysteine ligase, and NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1, increase glutathione (a product of the modulatory subunit of gamma-glutamyl-cysteine ligase), directly quench free radicals, and inhibit p300 HAT activity. These preclinical studies are expected to lead to clinical trials to prove the potential of this age-old golden spice for treating cancer patients.
 BACKGROUND: Deregulation of apoptosis will influence the balance of cell proliferation and cell death, resulting in various fatal diseases that can include cancer. In prior research reports related to cancer therapy, phytohemagglutinin, a lectin extracted from red kidney beans, demonstrated the ability to inhibit the growth of human cancer cells. However, one of its isoforms, erythroagglutinating, has yet to be evaluated on its anticancer effects. METHODS: PHA-E was used to induce apoptosis of A-549 lung cancer cells and the possible signal transduction pathway was elucidated, as measured by the MTT (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) assay, G6PD release assay, flow cytometry, and Western blot analysis. RESULTS: PHA-E treatment caused a dose-dependent increase of cell growth inhibition and cytotoxicity on A-549 cells. In annexin V/propidium iodide [i.e., PI] and TUNEL (terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick-end labeling)/PI assay, we found that the rate of apoptotic cells was raised as the concentration of PHA-E increased. Treatment of A-549 cells with PHA-E resulted in enhancing the release of cytochrome c, which thus activated an increase in caspase 9 and caspase 3, the upregulation of Bax and Bad, the downregulation of Bcl-2 and phosphorylated Bad, and finally the inhibition of the epidermal growth factor receptor and its downstream signal pathway PI3K/Akt and MEK/ERK. CONCLUSIONS: PHA-E can induce growth inhibition and cytotoxicity of lung cancer cells, which is mediated through an activation of the mitochondria apoptosis pathway. These results suggest that PHA-E can be developed into a new therapeutic treatment that can be applied as an effective anti-lung cancer drug in the near future.
 We have recently developed a novel optical technology, partial wave spectroscopic (PWS) microscopy, which is exquisitely sensitive to the nanoarchitectural manifestation of the genetic/epigenetic alterations of field carcinogenesis. Our approach was to screen for lung cancer by assessing the cheek cells based on emerging genetic/epigenetic data which suggests that the buccal epithelium is altered in lung field carcinogenesis. We performed PWS analysis from microscopically normal buccal epithelial brushings from smokers with and without lung cancer (n = 135). The PWS parameter, disorder strength of cell nanoarchitecture (L(d)), was markedly (>50%) elevated in patients harboring lung cancer compared with neoplasia-free smokers. The performance characteristic was excellent with an area under the receiver operator characteristic curve of >0.80 and was equivalent for both disease stage (early versus late) and histologies (small cell versus non-small cell lung cancers). An independent data set validated the findings with only a minimal degradation of performance characteristics. Our results offer proof of concept that buccal PWS may potentially herald a minimally intrusive prescreening test that could be integral to the success of lung cancer population screening programs. Cancer Res; 70(20); 7748-54. ©2010 AACR.
 Vascular endothelial growth factor and its receptors, including Flt-1 and Flk-1, are involved in angiogenesis under physiologic and pathologic conditions. Recently, Flt-1-expressing cells were reported to contribute to the intracranial growth of glioma cells. However, the role of Flt-1 signaling in solid tumor growth in s.c. tissue has not been elucidated. To investigate how Flt-1 signaling is involved in the proliferation of solid tumors, we implanted tumor cells into wild-type (Wt) and Flt-1 tyrosine kinase (TK)-deficient (Flt-1 TK(-/-)) mice. Growth of HSML and B16 but not Lewis lung carcinoma cell in s.c. tissue was significantly decreased in Flt-1 TK(-/-) mice. Angiogenesis in HSML and B16 tumors was remarkably reduced in Flt-1 TK(-/-) mice. Moreover, the infiltration of macrophage lineage cells into HSML and B16 tumors was clearly suppressed in Flt-1 TK(-/-) mice. Pericyte marker(+) cells were also reduced in Flt-1 TK(-/-) mice. However, in the border area of tumor, angiogenesis and the infiltration of macrophage lineage cell were basically similar between Wt and Flt-1 TK(-/-) mice. In bone marrow (BM) transplantation experiments, tumor angiogenesis, infiltration of macrophage lineage cells, and tumor growth were significantly suppressed in Wt/Flt-1 TK(-/-) mice implanted with Flt-1 TK(-/-) BM cells compared with those implanted with Wt BM cells. We conclude that Flt-1 signaling is involved in the function of BM-derived cell, such as the migration of macrophages into cancerous tissues, and significantly contributes to angiogenesis and tumor progression. Cancer Res; 70(20); 8211-21. ©2010 AACR.
 Background The contemporary impact of heart failure (HF) versus the most common forms of cancer as reflected by related first-ever hospitalizations and subsequent case-fatality rates is unknown. Methods and Results Using a national registry in Sweden, we compared the rate of first-ever hospitalization and associated short- and long-term survival for HF, acute myocardial infarction (AMI), and the most common forms of cancer on an age and sex-specific basis during 1988 to 2004 in 949 733 Swedish patients (1 162 309 hospital admissions in total). Annual incidence of first-ever hospitalization for HF, AMI, and cancer in Sweden were 484, 424, and 373 (lung, colorectal, prostate, and bladder cancer combined) per 100 000 men and 470, 280, and 350 (lung, colorectal, bladder, breast, and ovarian cancer combined) per 100 000 women age >20 years. The ratio of individual cases of HF to cancer was 1.37:1 (465 998 versus 340 738). Despite improvements in 30-day and 5-year survival (adjusted 7% and 6% increase per calendar year for men and women, respectively), HF was associated with unadjusted case-fatality rate of 59% within 5 years and 196 400 deaths versus 58% and 131 000 deaths in patients with cancer. During 10-year follow-up, HF was associated with 66 318 versus 55 364 premature life-years lost than all common forms of cancer in men. In women, the equivalent figures were 59 535 versus 64 533 premature life-years lost. Conclusions These data confirm that, like most common forms of cancer combined, HF exerts a major health burden in respect to age-adjusted rates of first hospitalization, poor overall survival, and premature life-years lost.
 Acquired capability of tumor cells to migrate and invade neighboring tissues is associated with high metastatic potential and advanced stage of cancers. Recently, signaling molecules such as reactive oxygen species (ROS) and caveolin-1 (Cav-1) have been implicated in the aggressive behavior of cancer cells. However, the role of specific ROS in cancer cell migration and Cav-1 regulation are unclear. We demonstrate here that Cav-1 plays an important role in the migration and invasion of human lung carcinoma H460 cells and that these effects are differentially regulated by cellular ROS. Using various known inhibitors and donors of ROS, we found that different ROS have different effects on Cav-1 expression and cell migration and invasion. Superoxide anion and hydrogen peroxide down-regulated Cav-1 expression and inhibited cell migration and invasion, while hydroxyl radical up-regulated the Cav-1 expression and promoted cell migration and invasion. The down-regulating effect of super-oxide anion and hydrogen peroxide on Cav-1 is mediated through a transcription-independent mechanism that involves protein degradation via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. These results indicate the essential role of different ROS in cancer cell motility and through Cav-1 expression, which may provide a key mechanism controlling tumor progression and metastasis. The up-regulation of Cav-1 and cell motility by hydroxyl free radical suggests an important role of this ROS as a positive regulator of tumor progression.
 Claiming more than 150,000 lives each year, lung cancer is the deadliest cancer in the USA. First-line treatments in lung cancer include surgical resection and chemotherapy, the latter of which offers only modest survival benefits at the expense of often severe and debilitating side effects. Recent advances in elucidating the molecular biology of lung carcinogenesis have elucidated novel drug targets, and treatments are rapidly evolving into specialized agents that hone in on specific aspects of the disease. Of particular interest is blocking tumor growth by targeting the physiological processes surrounding angiogenesis, pro-tumorigenic growth factor activation, anti-apoptotic cascades and other cancer-promoting signal transduction events. This article looks at several areas of interest to lung cancer therapeutics and considers the current state of affairs surrounding the development of these therapies.
 Abstract A biologically based two-stage carcinogenesis model is applied to epidemiological data for lung cancer mortality in a large uranium miner cohort of the WISMUT company (Germany). To date, this is the largest uranium miner cohort analyzed by a mechanistic model, comprising 35,084 workers among whom 461 died from lung cancer in the follow-up period 1955&#x2013;1998. It comprises only workers who were first employed between 1955 and 1989 and contains information on annual exposures to radon progeny. We fitted the model's free parameters, including the average growth time of one malignant cell into a lethal tumor. This lag time has an extraordinary value of 13 to 14&#x00A0;years, larger than that previously used or found in miner studies. Even though cohort-wide information on smoking habits is limited and the calendar-year dependence of tobacco smoke exposure was only implicitly accounted for by a birth cohort effect, we find good agreement between the modeled (expected) and empirical (observed) lung cancer mortality. Model calculations of excess relative lung cancer death risk agree well with those from the descriptive, BEIR VI-type exposure-age-concentration model for WISMUT miners. The large variety of exposure profiles in the cohort leads to a well-determined mechanistic model that in principle allows for an extrapolation from occupational to indoor radon exposure.
 Abstract Context.&#x2014;Podoplanin is a mucin-type glycoprotein and a lymphatic endothelial marker. Immunohistochemical staining for podoplanin is currently used as a routine pathologic diagnosis tool in Japan to identify lymphatic invasion of cancer cells. Recent reports suggest that podoplanin and other proangiogenic molecules are expressed in stromal fibroblasts and myofibroblasts. Objective.&#x2014;To analyze the distribution of podoplanin expression in tumor stroma and its clinical and biologic significance. Design.&#x2014;We performed immunohistochemistry for podoplanin on tissue microarrays from 1350 cases of 14 common cancer types. Results.&#x2014;Two hundred eighty-seven of 662 cases (43%) showed podoplanin expression in the stromal cells within cancer nests. Stromal podoplanin expression in 14 common cancer types was significantly associated with tumor stage (P &lt; .001), lymph node metastases (P &lt; .001), lymphatic invasion (P &#x200A;=&#x200A; .02), and venous invasion (P &lt; .001). The stromal cells positive for podoplanin were also positive for &#x03B1;-smooth muscle actin but negative for desmin, confirming a myofibroblasts phenotype. In contrast, myofibroblasts in inflammatory fibrotic lung diseases were podoplanin negative. Lymphatic vessel density was greater in the stromas with podoplanin expression than in the stroma lacking podoplanin-expressing stromal cells (P &#x200A;=&#x200A; .01). Survival data were available for non&#x2013;small cell lung cancer. Stromal podoplanin expression was associated with poorer prognosis in adenocarcinoma (P &lt; .001) and remains statistically significant after adjustment for sex, age, and stage (P &#x200A;=&#x200A; .01). Conclusion.&#x2014;Our data indicate that podoplanin expression in stromal myofibroblasts may function as a proangiogenic biomarker and may serve as a predictive marker of lymphatic/vascular spread of cancer cells and a prognostic marker of patient survival.
 CONTEXT: The diagnosis of lung cancer is often confirmed by cytology and biopsy specimens obtained during a bronchoscopic procedure. At our institution, these specimens are read by different pathologists, and the rate of concordance was not known. OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the concordance rate in the diagnosis of lung cancer types between cytology and biopsy specimens and to correlate discordance with patient outcome. DESIGN: Specimens obtained during the same procedure, between January 1, 2000, and December 31, 2005, were identified. Cases with cytology and biopsy specimens positive for cancer were evaluated for concordance of histologic type, small cell versus non–small cell lung carcinoma. Cases with different types were considered discordant, and slides were reviewed. RESULTS: Of 231 cases, 225 (97.4%) had concordant diagnoses. Discordance was the result of misinterpretation of undifferentiated carcinoma, overinterpretation of squamous dysplasia, interpretation of suboptimal specimens with necrosis and crush artifact, and sampling error. CONCLUSIONS: Even though the cytology and biopsy specimens were reviewed by different pathologists, the concordance rate for histologic type at our institution was high, emphasizing that this is a safe practice. The few discordant cases did not affect the patient's outcome.
 Homeless persons are at high risk for medical illness, particularly for head and neck cancers, but they face several barriers to receiving adequate health care. We conducted cancer screening and education about head and neck cancer risk factors in one such population (n = 325). Although 41.4% of the participants reported at least 1 otolaryngologic sign or symptom, and 8.6% reported having 2 or more symptoms, most of them (72.3%) had received no medical care. The symptom reported most often was a change in voice (17.2%). In all, 11% of the participants were referred for head or neck cancer evaluation, and 9% of those undergoing biopsy had a malignancy that was later treated. Nearly 75% of participants had at least a ninth-grade education. However, although 71.2% knew that the use of tobacco can lead to lung cancer, 78.9% did not recognize that it can also lead to head or neck cancer. In this population, cigarette smoking was associated with more than doubled odds of follow-up medical care (odds ratio, 2.31). Head and neck cancers cause substantial morbidity and mortality. Community outreach programs can be an excellent starting point to improving early detection and health education for underserved communities.
 BACKGROUND:: Apricoxib, a novel once-daily selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor, was investigated in combination with erlotinib for recurrent stage IIIB/IV nonsmall cell lung cancer to determine the maximum tolerated dose, dose-limiting toxicity, and recommended phase II dose (RP2D) based on changes in urinary prostaglandin E(2) metabolite (PGE-M). METHODS:: Patients received escalating doses of apricoxib (100, 200, and 400 mg/day) in combination with erlotinib 150 mg/day until disease progression or unacceptable toxicity. Urinary PGE-M was used to assess biologic activity and inform the optimal biologic dose. RESULTS:: Twenty patients were treated (3 at 100 mg; 3 at 200 mg; 14 at 400 mg apricoxib) with a median of 4 cycles (range, 2-14 cycles); 8 patients (40%) received prior EGFR-directed therapies. No dose-limiting toxicity was observed. Study drug-related adverse events (AEs) included diarrhea, rash, dry skin, anemia, fatigue, and increased serum creatinine; 4 patients had grade ≥3 drug-related AEs (diarrhea, perforated duodenal ulcer, hypophosphatemia, and deep vein thrombosis). The RP2D was 400 mg/day based on safety, biologic activity based on decreases in urinary PGE-M, and pharmacokinetics. One patient had a partial response, and 11 had stable disease. Stable disease was observed in patients who had received prior EGFR inhibitor therapy but was greater in patients not previously treated with an EGFR inhibitor. Seventeen patients had elevated urinary PGE-M at baseline, and 14 (70%) had a decrease from baseline, which was associated with disease control. CONCLUSIONS:: Apricoxib plus erlotinib was well tolerated and yielded a 60% disease control rate. A phase II trial is currently investigating 400 mg/day apricoxib plus 150 mg/day erlotinib in patients selected based on change in urinary PGE-M. Cancer 2010. © 2010 American Cancer Society.
 BACKGROUND:: Minimally invasive approaches to oesophagectomy are being used increasingly, but there remain concerns regarding safety and oncological acceptability. This study reviewed the outcomes of totally minimally invasive oesophagectomy (MIO; 41 patients), hybrid procedures (partially minimally invasive; 34) and open oesophagectomy (46) for oesophageal cancer from a single unit. METHODS:: Demographic and clinical data were entered into a prospective database. MIO was thoracoscopic-laparoscopic-cervical anastomosis, hybrid surgery was thoracoscopic-laparotomy or laparoscopic gastric mobilization-thoracotomy, and open resections were left thoracoabdominal (LTA), Ivor Lewis (IL) or transhiatal oesophagectomy (THO). RESULTS:: There were 118 resections for carcinoma (23 squamous cell carcinoma, 95 adenocarcinoma) and three for high-grade dysplasia. MIO took longer than open surgery (median 6·5 h versus 4·8 h for THO, 4·7 h for IL and LTA). MIO required less epidural time (P < 0·001 versus IL and LTA, P = 0·009 versus thorascopic hybrid, P = 0·014 versus laparoscopic IL). Despite a shorter duration of single-lung ventilation with MIO compared with IL and LTA (median 90 versus 150 min; P = 0·013), respiratory complication rates and duration of hospital stay were similar. There were seven anastomotic leaks after MIO, four after hybrid procedures and one following open surgery. Mortality rates were 2, 6 and 2 per cent respectively. Lymph node harvests were similar between all groups, as were rates of complete (R0) resection in patients with locally advanced tumours. CONCLUSION:: MIO is technically feasible. It does not reduce pulmonary complications or length of stay. Oncological outcomes appear equivalent. Copyright © 2010 British Journal of Surgery Society Ltd. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
 Urinary tract carcinomas are among the most common malignancies and are derived from neoplastic transformation of the urothelium. They can be located in the lower (bladder, urethra) or upper (pyelocaliceal cavities, ureter) urinary tract. Urothelial carcinomas are the fourth most common cancer type after prostate or breast cancer, lung cancer, and colorectal cancer. Bladder cancer accounts for 90-95% of urothelial carcinomas and it is the most common malignancy of the urinary tract. Renal cancer also belongs to the urothelial carcinomas and is a relatively uncommon solid tumor, accounting for about 3% of all adult malignancies, although its incidence is on the rise. The most common histological subtype, renal cell carcinoma (RCC), is a clear cell carcinoma that makes up approximately 70-80% of all renal neoplasms and appears to be the only histological subtype that is partially responsive to immunotherapeutic approaches. The current review gives an overview of upper urinary tract tumors and renal cancer, in particular RCC, highlighting issues related to its molecular pathogenesis and the new immunotherapeutic approaches.
 Neoplastic diseases can cause renal damage directly or indirectly. Also their treatment can provoke renal damage. The incidence and prevalence of paraneoplastic glomerulonephritis, especially associated with solid tumors, are a matter of debate and the causal link between cancer and glomerular diseases remains unclear. Paraneoplastic glomerulonephritis is a rare occurrence, with a slightly higher prevalence in the elderly. The most common cancer types associated with paraneoplastic glomerular disease are carcinoma of the lung and the gastrointestinal tract. Membranous nephropathy is the most frequent but not the only presentation of paraneoplastic glomerulonephritis. Patients with unexplained nephrotic syndrome, especially if older than 60 years, with membranous nephropathy and/or with their own risk factors for malignancies should be screened for occult cancer at diagnosis and be followed up carefully after the diagnosis. The primary treatment of paraneoplastic glomerulopathy must be aimed at the cancer and immunosuppressive treatment must obviously be avoided.
 The aim of this study was to define the standardized incidence ratio (SIR) of malignancy and the potential risk factors of concomitant malignancies in patients with inflammatory myopathies, including clinically amyopathic dermatomyositis (CADM). A total of 145 patients diagnosed with either dermatomyositis/polymyositis (DM/PM) or CADM at our institute between 1984 and 2002 were enrolled in the study. The demographic, clinical and laboratory features of the patients at the time of DM/PM or CADM diagnosis were compared between patients with and without malignancies, respectively. Multivariate analysis by logistic regression was used to determine the independent risk factors for the development of malignancies in DM/PM patients. Malignancy was found in 17 of 70 patients with DM (24%), three of 15 patients with CADM (20%), and three of 51 patients with PM (6%). Gastric cancer (8/23) was the most common malignancy. Compared with general population, the SIR of malignancies was 13.8 (range 9.0-21.1). The patients who developed malignancies were older (61.5 vs. 51.1 years; P < 0.005), presented more often with dysphagia (61 vs. 15%; P < 0.0001) and were less likely to have the complication of interstitial lung disease (30 vs. 60%; P < 0.05). These features were independent predictive factors for developing malignancies in multiple logistic regression analysis. The results of our study confirm that CADM in addition to DM was associated with high rates of malignancy among our patient cohort.
 INTRODUCTION: Radiotherapy is known to cause rarely various malignancies including leukemia, sarcoma, and thyroid and lung carcinoma. Post-radiation sarcomas account for 0.5-5.5% of all sarcomas; and include extra skeletal osteosarcoma, fibrosarcoma leiomyosarcoma, and malignant fibrous histiocytoma. Reports on post radiotherapy malignant fibrous histiocytoma in cervical cancer patients are rare. CASE REPORT: We present a case of 45-years-old female diagnosed with squamous cell carcinoma of the uterine cervix stage IIB; she underwent a radical hysterectomy with pelvic lymphadenectomy and postoperative radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Five years later, she presented with ulcerated nodular masses in right and left medial aspect of thigh. Cytological and histological diagnosis of the masses was malignant fibrous histiocytoma which was further confirmed by immunohistochemistry. CONCLUSION: Post-irradiation sarcoma must be considered in patients of carcinoma cervix treated with radiotherapy, when soft tissue mass is seen in the previously irradiated area. It should be differentiated from metastasis from primary tumor with the help of appropriate markers as it has a grave prognosis.
 Exposure to endotoxin, a component of gram-negative bacterial cell walls, is widespread in many industrial settings and in the ambient environment. Heavy-exposure environments include livestock farms, cotton textile facilities, and saw mills. In this article, we review epidemiologic, clinical trial, and experimental studies pertinent to the hypothesis that endotoxin prevents cancer. Since the 1970s, epidemiologic studies of cotton textile and other endotoxin-exposed occupational groups have consistently demonstrated reduced lung cancer risks. Experimental animal toxicology research and some limited therapeutic trials in cancer patients offer additional support for an anticarcinogenic potential. The underlying biological mechanisms of anticarcinogenesis are not entirely understood but are thought to involve the recruitment and activation of immune cells and proinflammatory mediators (e.g., tumor necrosis factor α and interleukin-1 and -6). In view of the current state of knowledge, it would be premature to recommend endotoxin as a cancer-chemopreventive agent. However, further epidemiologic and experimental investigations that can clarify further dose-effect and exposure-timing relations could have substantial public health and basic biomedical benefits.
 BACKGROUND:: To evaluate risk factors that predict brain metastasis in epithelial ovarian, fallopian tube, and peritoneal cancer. METHODS:: All patients with FIGO stage I to IV who underwent initial cytoreductive surgery between January 1995 and January 2009 were evaluated. The tumor samples were evaluated for 7 markers including multidrug resistance gene (MDR-1), DNA aneuploidity and S-phase fraction, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2, estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, p53 mutation, epidermal growth factor receptor, and CD31. Biomarker expression was evaluated as a predictor of hematogenous metastasis to the following locations: (i) liver and spleen, (ii) lung, and (iii) brain. RESULTS:: There were 309 cases identified during the period. Of those, 5 (1.6%, 95% CI: 0.2%-3.0%) women developed brain metastasis. Time to onset of brain metastasis was significantly longer than that for other recurrent sites (median time to recurrence after initial cytoreduction, brain vs. lung vs. liver, 21.4 vs. 12.6 vs. 11.0 months, P < 0.05). Significantly increased expression of MDR-1 was seen in tumors from women who developed brain metastasis (brain vs. nonbrain sites, 80% vs. 4.2%-24.3%, P = 0.004). In multivariate analysis, MDR-1 was the only significant variable associated with the risk of brain metastasis. MDR-1 expression predicted brain metastasis (receiver-operator-characteristic curve analysis, AUC 0.808, P = 0.018), and with a 10% positive expression of MDR-1 as the cutoff value, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, accuracy of prediction of brain metastasis were 80%, 86.1%, 15.4%, 99.3%, and 85.9%, respectively (odds ratio: 24.7, 95% CI: 2.64-232, P = 0.002). CONCLUSIONS:: Increased expression of MDR-1 in the tumor tissue obtained at initial cytoreduction is associated with increased risk of developing brain metastases in women with epithelial ovarian, fallopian tube, or peritoneal cancer.
 BACKGROUND: Studies have reported young ages at cancer diagnosis in HIV-infected persons and have suggested that HIV accelerates carcinogenesis. However, these comparisons did not account for differences in population age structures. OBJECTIVE: To compare ages at diagnosis for non-AIDS-defining types of cancer that occur in both the AIDS and general populations, after adjustment for differences in age and other demographic characteristics between these populations. DESIGN: Registry linkage study. SETTING: 15 HIV/AIDS and cancer registry databases in the United States. PARTICIPANTS: 212 055 persons with AIDS enrolled in the U.S. HIV/AIDS Cancer Match Study from 1996 to 2007. MEASUREMENTS: Comparison of age-at-diagnosis distributions for various types of cancer in both the AIDS and general populations, after adjustment for age and other demographic characteristics. RESULTS: The proportion of person-time contributed by older persons (age ≥65 years) was far smaller in the AIDS population (1.5%) than in the general population (12.5%). Reflecting this difference, the ages at diagnosis for most types of cancer were approximately 20 years younger among persons with AIDS. However, after adjustment for differences in the populations at risk, the median ages at diagnosis in the AIDS and general populations did not differ for most types of cancer (for example, colon, prostate, or breast cancer; all P > 0.100). In contrast, ages at diagnosis of lung (median, 50 vs. 54 years) and anal cancer (median, 42 vs. 45 years) were significantly younger in persons with AIDS than expected in the general population (P < 0.001), and the age at diagnosis of Hodgkin lymphoma was significantly older (median, 42 vs. 40 years; P < 0.001). LIMITATIONS: Information on other cancer risk factors, including cigarette smoking, was not available. Analysis was restricted to non-Hispanic white and black persons who had AIDS, which could limit the generalizability of the findings to other racial and ethnic groups or to persons with HIV but not AIDS. CONCLUSION: For most types of cancer, the age at diagnosis is similar in the AIDS and general populations, after adjustment for the ages of the populations at risk. Modest age differences remained for a few types of cancer, which may indicate either acceleration of carcinogenesis by HIV or earlier exposure to cancer risk factors. PRIMARY FUNDING SOURCE: National Cancer Institute.
 PURPOSE Randomized clinical trials failed to show a survival benefit for epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors plus concurrent chemotherapy in patients with metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), with preclinical data suggesting potential negative interactions. In contrast, pilot trials of the EGFR-targeted antibody, cetuximab, plus chemotherapy suggested enhanced antitumor activity. This randomized phase II trial was designed to select a cetuximab plus chemotherapy regimen for phase III evaluation. PATIENTS AND METHODS Treatment-naive patients with advanced-stage NSCLC were randomly assigned to receive paclitaxel (225 mg/m(2)) and carboplatin (area under the curve, 6) every 3 weeks plus concurrent cetuximab (400 mg/m(2) loading dose followed by 250 mg/m(2) weekly) for four cycles followed by maintenance cetuximab or sequential paclitaxel-carboplatin for four cycles followed by cetuximab. Results Of 242 patients enrolled, 224 were eligible and assessable for response (106 and 118 patients in the concurrent and sequential arms, respectively). With a median follow-up time of 32 months, the median overall survival was 10.9 months (95% CI, 9.2 to 13.0 months) for patients receiving concurrent therapy and 10.7 months (95% CI, 8.5 to 12.8 months) for patients receiving sequential therapy (P = .57); 1-year survival rates were 45% (95% CI, 36% to 54%) and 44% (95% CI, 35% to 53%), respectively. Response rates and progression-free survival times were similar in both arms, as was grade 3 rash, whereas sensory neuropathy was higher in the concurrent arm (15% v 5% in the sequential arm; P = .036). CONCLUSION Although both regimens met the efficacy criterion for continued evaluation, the concurrent regimen of paclitaxel/carboplatin plus cetuximab was chosen.
 In patients with metastatic colorectal cancer, the predictive value of KRAS mutational status in the selection of patients for treatment with anti-epidermal growth factor (EGFR) monoclonal antibodies is established. In patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), the utility of determining KRAS mutational status to predict clinical benefit to anti-EGFR therapies remains unclear. This review will provide a brief description of Ras biology, provide an overview of aberrant Ras signaling in NSCLC, and summarize the clinical data for using KRAS mutational status as a negative predictive biomarker to anti-EGFR therapies. Retrospective investigations of KRAS mutational status as a negative predictor of clinical benefit from anti-EGFR therapies in NSCLC have been performed; however, small samples sizes as a result of low prevalence of KRAS mutations and the low rate of tumor sample collection have limited the strength of these analyses. Although an association between the presence of KRAS mutation and lack of response to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) has been observed, it remains unclear whether there is an association between KRAS mutation and EGFR TKI progression-free and overall survival. Unlike colorectal cancer, KRAS mutations do not seem to identify patients who do not benefit from anti-EGFR monoclonal antibodies in NSCLC. The future value of testing for KRAS mutational status may be to exclude the possibility of an EGFR mutation or anaplastic lymphoma kinase translocation or to identify a molecular subset of patients with NSCLC in whom to pursue a drug development strategy that targets the KRAS pathway.
 To examine the role of breast cancer stem cells (BCSCs) in metastasis, we generated human-in-mouse breast cancer orthotopic models using patient tumor specimens, labeled with optical reporter fusion genes. These models recapitulate human cancer features not captured with previous models, including spontaneous metastasis in particular, and provide a useful platform for studies of breast tumor initiation and progression. With noninvasive imaging approaches, as few as 10 cells of stably labeled BCSCs could be tracked in vivo, enabling studies of early tumor growth and spontaneous metastasis. These advances in BCSC imaging revealed that CD44(+) cells from both primary tumors and lung metastases are highly enriched for tumor-initiating cells. Our metastatic cancer models, combined with noninvasive imaging techniques, constitute an integrated approach that could be applied to dissect the molecular mechanisms underlying the dissemination of metastatic CSCs (MCSCs) and to explore therapeutic strategies targeting MCSCs in general or to evaluate individual patient tumor cells and predict response to therapy.
 Using an orthotopic model of renal cell carcinoma, we showed previously that IL-2/anti-CD40 immunotherapy resulted in synergistic anti-tumor responses, whereas IL-2 or α-CD40 alone mediated partial transient anti-tumor effects. We now show that treatment of tumor-bearing mice with IL-2/α-CD40, but not IL-2 or α-CD40, induced significant nitric oxide synthase (NOS) 2 expression in tumor-associated macrophages. In control-treated mice (low NO), NOS2 inhibition reduced tumor burden. However, during immunotherapy (high NO), NOS2 inhibition or macrophage depletion reversed the ability of IL-2/α-CD40 treatment to reduce lung metastases but had no effect on primary tumor burden. Furthermore, IL-2/α-CD40 induced the IFN-γ- and NO-dependent decrease in matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) expression and activity, concomitant with increases in tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP) 1 and E-cadherin expression within tumors. Finally, treatment of tumor-bearing mice with the NO donor JS-K significantly reduced metastases. These data differentiate the mechanism for primary anti-tumor effects of IL-2/α-CD40 immunotherapy, which are independent of NO, from the NO-dependent inhibition of metastases. Furthermore, reduced MMP9 activity implicates M1-polarized macrophages within the tumor microenvironment as critical components of therapeutic response. Our data demonstrate the mechanistic basis for IL-2/α-CD40-mediated control of metastases and suggest that the context-dependent application of NO donors may hold promise for prevention of metastatic disease.
 Background: Profile regression is a Bayesian statistical approach designed for investigating the joint effect of multiple risk factors. It reduces dimensionality by using as its main unit of inference the subjects' exposure profiles, i.e. the sequence of covariate values that correspond to each subject. Objectives: We applied profile regression to a case-control study of lung cancer in non smokers, nested within the EPIC cohort, in order to estimate the combined effect of environmental carcinogens and explore possible gene-environment interactions. Methods: We tailored and extended the profile regression approach to the analysis of case-control studies, allowing for the analysis of ordinal data and the computation of posterior odds ratios. We compare and contrast our results to those obtained using standard logistic regression and classification tree methods including multi-factor dimensionality reduction (MDR). Results: Profile regression strengthened previous observations in other study populations on the role of air pollutants, in particular PM10, in non smokers' lung cancer. Covariates including living on a main road, exposure to PM10 and NO2, and carrying out manual work characterised high risk subject profiles. Such combinations of risk factors were consistent with a priori expectations. In contrast, other methods gave less interpretable results. Conclusions: We conclude that profile regression is a powerful tool for identifying risk profiles that express the joint effect of aetiologically relevant variables in multifactorial diseases.
 Combining the functional data provided by single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) with the anatomical information provided by CT has been shown to improve overall diagnostic accuracy in many areas of nuclear medicine. Although planar lung scans have often relied on correlation with a chest x-ray to help optimize scan interpretation, the advent of 3D lung imaging with SPECT provides the opportunity to combine lung perfusion data with CT images. This can be done by performing the study on a hybrid SPECT/CT scanner, with the CT acquisition typically performed with the use of low-dose parameters, rather than full diagnostic quality settings, or by software fusion with a fully diagnostic CT or a contrast-enhanced CT pulmonary angiogram. Such an approach has been shown to improve specificity and overall accuracy of ventilation/perfusion scintigraphy as well as facilitating more accurate clot localization. With the increased availability of hybrid SPECT/CT scanners, such an approach can be implemented in most imaging departments with little additional acquisition time or radiation dose. Misregistration caused by respiratory motion can impact combined studies, although this can be minimized with attention to patient breathing patterns during image acquisition. For patients with lung cancer, ventilation/perfusion SPECT/CT may have a role in allowing the optimal selection of radiotherapy fields and can improve the preoperative quantification of lung function before resection.
 Thioredoxin reductase (TR1) is a selenoprotein that is involved in cellular redox status control and deoxyribonucleotide biosynthesis. Many cancers, including lung, overexpress TR1, making it a potential cancer therapy target. Previous work has shown that TR1 knockdown enhances the sensitivity of cancer cells to anticancer treatments, as well as certain selenocompounds. However, it is unknown if TR1 knockdown produces similar effect on the sensitivity of human lung cancer cells. To further elucidate the role of TR1 in the mechanism of selenocompounds in lung cancer, a lentiviral microRNA delivery system to knockdown TR1 expression in A549 human lung adenocarcinoma cells was utilized. Cell viability was assessed after 48 hr treatment with the selenocysteine prodrug selenazolidines 2-butylselenazolidine-4(R)-carboxylic acid (BSCA) and 2-cyclohexylselenazolidine-4-(R)-carboxylic acid (ChSCA), selenocystine (SECY), methylseleninic acid (MSA), 1,4-phenylenebis(methylene)selenocyanate (p-XSC), and selenomethionine (SEM). TR1 knockdown increased the cytotoxicity of BSCA, ChSCA, and SECY but did not sensitize cells to MSA, SEM, or p-XSC. GSH and TR1 depletion together decreased cell viability, while no change was observed with GSH depletion alone. Reactive oxygen species generation was induced only in TR1 knockdown cells treated with the selenazolidines or SECY. These three compounds also decreased total intracellular glutathione levels and oxidized thioredoxin, but in a TR1 independent manner. TR1 knockdown increased selenazolidine and SECY-induced mitochondrial membrane depolarization, as well as DNA strand breaks and AIF translocation from the mitochondria. These results indicate the ability of TR1 to modulate the cytotoxic effects of BSCA, ChSCA and SECY in human lung cancer cells through mitochondrial dysfunction.
 BACKGROUND: Glomus tumor is an uncommon neoplasm derived from cells of the neuromyoarterial glomus or glomus body. Most glomus tumours occur in the dermis and subcutaneous tissues. A case of a primary pulmonary glomus tumour originating in the right upper lobe is presented. CASE PRESENTATION: A 74-yr-old male was admitted with siccus cough, dyspnea and right-sided chest pain. Computed tomography of the thorax revealed a 4 cm growth of the right upper lobe. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy demonstrated an endobronchial hypervascular mass causing obstruction of the apical segmental bronchus. Pathology report was consistent with pulmonary glomus tumor. The patient underwent a typical right upper lobectomy with mediastinal lymph node dissection. Twelve months later he is free of disease. CONCLUSION: Occasionally glomus tumors can occur in extracutaneous sites such as the gastrointestinal tract, bone, genitourinary system and respiratory tract. Primary pulmonary glomus tumors are very rare (our case is the 19th one presented in the international literature) and are often confused with other solid neoplasms such as carcinoids, hemangiopericytomas and tumors belonging to the family of Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumours.
 BACKGRAUND: Acute-phase response proteins (APRP), cytokines and hormones have been claimed to be an independent prognostic factor of malignancies, however the basis for their association with prognosis remains unexplained. We suggest that in colon malignancies, as similar to pancreatic and lung cancers, changes in APRP are associated with angiogenesis. METHODS: C-reactive protein (CRP), albumin, IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, TNF-α, midkine, VEGF-A, VEGF-C, leptin, adiponectin, and ghrelin serum levels are studied in 126 colon cancer patients and 36 healthy subjects. RESULTS: We found statistically significant difference and correlations between two groups. We found significantly higher serum CRP, IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, TNF-α, VEGF-A, VEGF-C and leptin concentrations in patients relative to controls (p < 0.001). We found lower levels of the serum albumin, midkine, adiponectin and ghrelin in patients compared to control subjects (p < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Cachexia in patients with colon cancers is associated with changes in APRP, cytokines and hormone concentrations. These biomarkers and cachexia together have a direct relationship with accelerated angiogenesis. This may lead to a connection between the outcomes in malignancies and the biomarkers.
 The Asia-Pacific region is home to a large heterogeneous population whose respiratory health is influenced by diverse social, economic and environmental factors. Despite this variability, the most prevalent causes of respiratory morbidity and mortality are tobacco smoking, infection, and air pollution. This review aims to summarise current respiratory health issues in the region including smoking-related diseases especially chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and lung cancer, infectious problems such as pandemic influenza, the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus, bacterial pneumonia and tuberculosis. Published data on trends in the epidemiology and management of respiratory diseases and are summarised; finally, the limitations of available data and projections for the future of respiratory health in the region are discussed.
 AIMS AND OBJECTIVE: To determine the health care needs of patients after surgical resection of lung cancer at discharge and evaluate the significance of factors associated with such needs. BACKGROUND: Other studies have found that symptom distress level, social supports and health beliefs are associated with health care needs. Design.  Sixty-two participants were recruited from a thoracic surgery clinic at a medical centre in Taipei from July-December 2005. Data related to demographic variables, disease characteristics, functional status, symptom distress and social support were collected. METHODS: The patients were administered the Karnofsky Performance Scale, the Symptom Distress Scale-Chinese Modified Form, the Social Support Scale (adapted from the Interpersonal Support Evaluation List), the Health Needs Scale and self-reported rating scales for pain. Data were analysed using Pearson's correlation coefficients and linear regression models. RESULTS: Pulmonary function was found to be correlated with the level of need for health care information and physiological care. Self-perceived symptom distress and degree of distress were also correlated with levels of need for information, physiological care and psychosocial care. The level of pain was found to be correlated with the level of need for health care information and physiological care. After controlling for pain level, multivariate analysis revealed that self-perceived symptom severity (p = 0·032) and degree of distress (p = 0·043) were modestly correlated with the need for health care. CONCLUSIONS: Pulmonary function, self-perceived symptom distress, degree of distress and level of pain were correlated with the level of need for health care information and physiological care. Self-perceived symptom severity and degree of distress were independent predictors of health care needs. RELEVANCE TO CLINICAL PRACTICE: Administration of relevant questionnaires to assess postoperative symptom distress may be necessary for optimal disease management.
 Abstract This study assessed the relationship between radon decay product (RDP) exposure and mortality and cancer incidence in a cohort of 17,660 Eldorado uranium workers first employed in 1932&#x2013;1980 and followed up through 1999. The analysis was based on substantially revised identifying information and dosimetry for workers from the Beaverlodge and Port Radium uranium mines and for the first time includes workers from a radium and uranium refinery and processing facility in Port Hope, Canada. Overall, male workers had lower mortality rates of all causes and all cancers and lower incidence rates of all cancers compared with the general Canadian male population, a likely healthy worker effect. Individual cancer rates were also reduced except for lung cancer mortality (SMR &#x200A;=&#x200A; 1.31, P &lt; 0.01) and incidence (SIR &#x200A;=&#x200A; 1.23, P &lt; 0.001). The excess relative risk per 100 WLM (ERR/100 WLM) of lung cancer mortality (N &#x200A;=&#x200A; 618, ERR/100 WLM &#x200A;=&#x200A; 0.55, 95% CI: 0.37, 0.78, P &lt; 0.01) and incidence (N &#x200A;=&#x200A; 626, ERR/100 WLM &#x200A;=&#x200A; 0.55, 95% CI: 0.37, 0.81, P &lt; 0.001) increased linearly with increasing RDP exposure. Adjustment for effect modification by time since exposure, exposure rate and age at risk resulted in comparable estimates of risk of lung cancer for all three uranium worksites. RDP exposures and &#x03B3;-ray doses were not associated with any other cancer site or other cause of death. The risk estimates are in agreement with the results of the pooled analysis of 11 miner cohorts and more recent studies of uranium workers. The current analysis provides more precise risk estimates and compares the findings from the mortality study with the incidence study. Future follow-up of the cohort and joint analysis with other uranium miners' studies should shed more light on the effects of low RDP exposures as experienced by current workers as well as help to understand and address the health risks associated with residential radon.
 Background : Vena cava superior syndrom results of an obstruction of superior vein cava(SVC)and/or brachiocaphalic venous troncs by extrinsic compression and/or by tumoral or cruoric thrombosis. The bronchopulmonary cancer represents the most frequent aetiology. Aim : The aim of this study is to establish clinical, radiological, evolutive profiles and modalities of treatment of neoplasic vena cava superior syndrom independently of its histological type. Methods: It is a retrospective study about 20 patients presenting vena cava superior syndrome compliquating primary bronchopulmonary cancer, hospitalised between January 2000 and December 2007 in Ibn Nafiss department in Abderrahmen Mami hospital. Resultats: All patients were males with an average of 57,8 yaers. Vena cava superior syndrome had revealed cancer in 60% of cases. It was metachrone in 40% of the patients. The most frequent histological type was small cell lung cancer. Treatment was proceeded in 2 steps, symptomatic and etiologic for the bronchopulmonary cancer. Conclusion: The bronchopulmonary cancer is the most frequent aetiology of vena cava superior syndrome. Its treatment is actually well codified.
 Erlotinib is an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor. Efficacy of this drug was documented in the BR.21 trial showing that adenocarcinoma, female gender, Asian ethnicity and never-smoker status are predictive of clinical response to erlotinib. Retrospective studies documented the same benefits for elderly patients as young patients in terms of response, progression-free survival, and overall survival. The primary aim of our trial was to confirm these findings in a prospective way; the secondary aim was to identify if the aforementioned clinical characteristics may be predictive of response even in elderly patients. The trial included 31 patients with pretreated stage IIIB (2) and IV (29) non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Median age was 75 years (range: 65-85). Twenty-seven patients were current/former-smokers and four never-smokers. Twenty-three patients are evaluable for response. Objective response rates were reported in five patients (16%). Five patients had stable disease (16%) and 13 progressive disease (43%). Seven patients had a "clinical benefit" from erlotinib (22.5%; 95% C.I.: 7.9-37.2%). Grade 3 skin rash was recorded in three patients (10%). Median survival was 9 months (range 1-30). Median time to progression was 3 months (range: 1-24 months). Our study confirmed erlotinib activity and safety as second- and third-line treatment in elderly patients with advanced NSCLC, especially in terms of median survival. Even though this trial does not allow us to draw a definitive conclusion about the role of a particular clinical characteristic predictive of response, the "clinical benefit" was documented especially in females, in patients with adenocarcinoma histology and skin rash, confirming previous retrospective data.
 PURPOSE: Radiosurgery (RS) is regarded as a standard therapy for metastatic brain tumors, but local failure requiring repeated therapy for the same lesion remains an unsolved problem. The authors analyzed outcomes of gamma knife surgery (GKS) for metastatic lesions to identify factors of local treatment failure. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The hospital records of 103 patients with a metastatic brain tumor and monitored for more than 6 months were analyzed. Lesion response to RS was analyzed in 77 patients with available gamma plan data. Local treatment failure was defined as lesion regrowth or repeat GKS within 6 months. In cases with multiple lesions, largest masses were evaluated. Primary sites, metastatic location, Karnofsky scale, tumor size, number of metastatic lesions, and various radiosurgical prescription parameters, namely, Paddick's conformity index (CI), Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG)-CI, and gradient index, were analyzed. RESULTS: Of the 103 study subjects, 58 were male and 45 were female. Primary sites were lung (n = 58), breast (n = 12), colon (n = 6), kidney (n = 7), rectum (n = 6), and others (n = 14). Median survival duration from the diagnosis of brain metastasis was 25 months. Local treatment failure occurred in 14 of 77 the patients (77 lesions) with available gamma plan data. A lung cancer primary site was found to have a lower GKS failure rate than a breast or a renal site (p < 0.05). Lesions with a high Paddicks' CI or a low RTOG-CI had a higher rate of treatment failure (p < 0.05). Multivariate analysis revealed that primary tumor site and Paddick's CI were related to treatment failure (p < 0.05). CONCLUSION: Brain metastases from renal and breast cancers had higher rates of local GKS treatment failure than those from lung cancer. Furthermore, high Paddick's CI revealed higher rate of local recurrence, and was not contributory to prevent local treatment failure. However, the enlargement of the diameter of the tumor after RS in the early follow-up period does not necessarily represent the poor outcome or need of retreatment.
 DUSP1/MKP1 is a dual-specific phosphatase that regulates MAPKs activity, with an increasingly recognized role in tumor biology. To understand more about the involvement of DUSP1 in lung cancer, we performed gene expression analyses of parental and DUSP1-interfered H460 non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells. Downregulation of DUSP1 induced changes in the expression levels of genes involved in specific biological pathways, including angiogenesis, MAP kinase phosphatase activity, cell-cell signaling, growth factor and tyrosine-kinase receptor activity. Changes in the expression of some of these genes were due to modulation of c-Jun-N-terminal kinase and/or p38 activity by DUSP1. Complementary functional assays were performed to focus on the implication of DUSP1 in angiogenesis and metastasis. In H460 cells, interference of DUSP1 resulted in a diminished capacity to invade through Matrigel, to grow tumors in nude mice and also to induce metastasis through tail-vein injection. Furthermore, the angiogenic potential of H460 cells was also impaired, correlating with a decrease in VEGFC production and indicating that DUSP1 could be required to induce angiogenesis. Finally, we studied whether a similar relationship occurred in patients. In human NSCLC specimens, DUSP1 was mainly expressed in those tumor cells close to CD31 vascular structures and a statistically significant correlation was found between VEGFC and DUSP1 expression. Overall, these results provide evidence for a role of DUSP1 in angiogenesis, invasion and metastasis in NSCLC.Oncogene advance online publication, 4 October 2010; doi:10.1038/onc.2010.449.
 ING2 (Inhibitor of Growth 2) is a candidate tumor suppressive protein frequently lost in human tumors. Recently, we have reported that ING2 downregulation impairs DNA replication forks progression and leads to genome instability. To better understand the tumor suppressive functions of ING2 and its role in the cell cycle, we downregulated its expression in cells and studied the consequences of this downregulation on the G(1)/S transition. We observed that the inhibition of ING2 expression accelerated the progression of cells from G(1) to S-phase, and was accompanied by a decrease of p21 expression. Moreover, we show that the regulation of p21 by ING2 is independent of the tumor suppressive protein p53. Interestingly, this function seems to be unique for ING2 since its closest homolog ING1 does not regulate the G(1)/S transition. It has been suggested previously that ING2 may modulate the trimethylation of H3K4 at the promoter of p21. Accordingly, our results suggest that there may be a link between the regulation of the G(1)/S transition by ING2 and the level of H3K4Me3. All together, these results bring new information concerning the role of ING2 in the regulation of the cell cycle and suggest that it may play important roles in controlling several S-phase checkpoints.
 PTHrP (parathyroid hormone-related protein) is abnormally expressed in a substantial majority of lung cancers, especially non-small cell lung cancers, and plays a key role in tumor progression. Thus, this oncoprotein could be a target for treating patients with lung cancer. This study screened combinatorial libraries of heterocyclic amines for inhibitory effects on PTHrP expression and cell proliferation. Two libraries of over 780,000 bis-cyclic thiourea and guanidine compounds each were tested in BEN lung carcinoma cells. The number of PTHrP inhibitors and the magnitude of the reduction in PTHrP were greater for thioureas. Selected lead thiourea compounds decreased cell PTHrP protein content in dose-dependent fashion, reduced relative abundance of PTHrP mRNA, decreased transcripts derived from the PTHrP P3 promoter and reduced activity of a full length PTHrP promoter luciferase construct. Similar effects on PTHrP mRNA were observed in A549 and H441 lung adenocarcinoma cells and in H727 lung carcinoid cells. However, the compounds only inhibited PTHrP protein levels in BEN cells and H727 cells. The compounds reduced the rate of cell proliferation in BEN cells and H727 cells, but not in lines that showed no inhibition of PTHrP protein. These results suggest that cyclic thiourea compounds inhibit PTHrP expression mediated by the P3 promoter, which is widely used in the majority of PTHrP-expressing cells, and that they may inhibit growth of lung cancer cells through the same mechanism. Further work will be necessary to investigate their mechanism for effects on growth of PTHrP-positive tumors in vivo.
 Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is an established treatment for a variety of malignant and nonmalignant conditions. Pulmonary complications, infectious and noninfectious, are a major cause of morbidity and mortality in these patients. The recent advances in prophylaxis and treatment of infectious complications increased the significance of noninfectious pulmonary conditions. Acute lung injury due to diffuse alveolar hemorrhage or idiopathic pneumonia syndrome are the main acute complications, while bronchiolitis obliterans remains the most challenging pulmonary complications facing clinicians who are taking care of HSCT recipients. There are other noninfectious pulmonary complications following HSCT that are less frequent. This report provides a clinical update of the incidence, risk factors, pathogenesis, clinical characteristics and management of the main noninfectious pulmonary complications following HSCT.
 Meningeal carcinomatosis (MC) from cervical cancer is rare. Diagnosis of this disease is often delayed due to variable presentation. We report an interesting case of MC from the uterine cervix and review general diagnostic and treatment considerations. The patient received chemotherapy and radiotherapy for stage IIB cervical cancer with resolution of symptoms for 3 years. Metastatic lesions were found in the right lung and paraaotic nodes on follow-up positron emission tomography scan, which completely resolved with subsequent chemotherapy. Unfortunately, the patient developed neurological symptoms consistent with MC, which was confirmed by cerebrospinal fluid cytology. Because of her poor cognition, available options were discussed with her family. She died peacefully in palliative care.
 Purpose Yttrium 90 (90 Y) microsphere radioembolization (90 Y-RE) is an emerging locoregional treatment for liver cancer. The most common complications of 90 Y-RE arise from excessive irradiation of nontarget organs (eg, gastrointestinal tract, lung, and nontumoral liver). Patients with advanced age may have substantial comorbidities that can affect their life expectancy, and tolerance to radiation in elderly patients may be altered. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the safety and survival of elderly patients treated with 90 Y-RE. Materials and Methods We analyzed 255 patients with liver tumors (primary or metastatic) who were treated with 90 Y-RE in our institution from September 2003 to February 2010. We categorized patients as "elderly" if aged ≥ 70 years and "younger" if aged < 70 years. Results Seventy-three patients (29%) were aged ≥ 70 years. The most frequent liver tumor among elderly patients was hepatocellular carcinoma. Complication rates were similar in both groups: 10.4% of elderly patients and 9.9% of younger patients developed radioembolization-induced liver disease (P = 1.000). Only 1.5% of elderly patients developed gastrointestinal ulceration and no patient in the elderly group developed pneumonitis. The median overall survival of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma was similar in elderly and younger groups (13 months, 95% confidence interval [CI], 10.4-15.5 and 12 months, 95% CI, 4.2-15.7; P = 0.4). In patients with colorectal carcinoma metastatic to the liver, the median overall survival was 10 months (95% CI, 5.2-14.7) for elderly patients and 13 months (95% CI, 7.0-18.9) for younger patients (P = 0.3). The median overall survival of patients with other histologies was 9 months (95% CI, 3.5-14.4) for younger patients and 4 months (95% CI, 2.7-5.2) for elderly patients (P = 0.9). Conclusion Elderly patients did not have more toxicity than younger patients treated with 90 Y-RE, and survival was similar for each histology. Elderly patients should be considered for 90 Y-RE if they otherwise meet the inclusion criteria applicable to younger patients.
 TNF receptor superfamily member 25 (TNFRSF25; also known as DR3, and referred to herein as TNFR25) is constitutively and highly expressed by CD4(+)FoxP3(+) Tregs. However, its function on these cells has not been determined. Here we used a TNFR25-specific agonistic monoclonal antibody, 4C12, to study the effects of TNFR25 signaling on Tregs in vivo in mice. Signaling through TNFR25 induced rapid and selective expansion of preexisting Tregs in vivo such that they became 30%-35% of all CD4(+) T cells in the peripheral blood within 4 days. TNFR25-induced Treg proliferation was dependent upon TCR engagement with MHC class II, IL-2 receptor, and Akt signaling, but not upon costimulation by CD80 or CD86; it was unaffected by rapamycin. TNFR25-expanded Tregs remained highly suppressive ex vivo, and Tregs expanded by TNFR25 in vivo were protective against allergic lung inflammation, a mouse model for asthma, by reversing the ratio of effector T cells to Tregs in the lung, suppressing IL-13 and Th2 cytokine production, and blocking eosinophil exudation into bronchoalveolar fluid. Our studies define what we believe to be a novel mechanism for Treg control and important functions for TNFR25 in regulating autoaggression that balance its known role in enhancing autoimmunity.
 RATIONALE: Previously, we reported that common variants in pre-miRNA sequences played a role in the prediction of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) survival. OBJECTIVES: To assess whether variants in the pre-miRNA flanking region can influence the clinical behavior of NSCLC. METHODS: we conducted a two-stage study to examine the impact of a panel of 85 SNPs on the overall survival of 923 NSCLC patients (568 in the screening set and 355 in the validation set) in China. MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Eleven single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were primarily associated with the NSCLC survival in the univariate analysis. However, in the validation set, only miR-30c-1 rs928508 was consistently a NSCLC survival predictor and the protective role of rs928508 AG/GG genotypes were more pronounced among early stage (stage I/II) patients and patients treated with surgery. The area under curve (AUC) at year 5 was significantly increased from 0.658 to 0.741 after adding the miR-30c-1 rs928508 risk score to the traditional clinical risk score (stage and surgery). Furthermore, in the genotype-phenotype correlation analysis, rs928508 AG/GG genotypes were associated with a significantly decreased expression of precursor and mature miR-30c (P=0.009 and 0.011), but not with that of its primary miRNA. The expression of the host nuclear transcription factor Y (NFYC) gene was correlated with pri-mir-30c-1, but not with rs928508 genotypes, implicating the co-regulation of the transcription of NFYC and pri-mir-30c-1. CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicated, for the first time, that genetic polymorphisms in the pre-miRNA flanking region may be prognostic biomarkers of NSCLC, and rs928508 is such a potential candidate.
 Cytochrome P450 1B1 (CYP1B1) is found in tumor tissue and is suspected to play a role in oncogenesis and drug resistance. CYP1B1 gene polymorphisms have been associated with the risk of lung and other cancers. They may be associated with tumor response to anticancer drugs. We have determined four frequent non-synonymous gene polymorphisms of CYP1B1 in the human tumor cell lines panels of the National Cancer Institute (NCI) and the Japanese Foundation for Cancer research (JFCR): rs10012 (R48G), rs1056827 (A119S), rs1056836 (L432V), and rs1800440 (N453S). Numerous anticancer drugs have been tested against these panels, which offer the opportunity to detect associations between gene polymorphisms and drug sensitivity. CYP1B1 SNPs were in marked linkage disequilibrium. The L432V allelic variants were significantly associated with reduced sensitivity to DNA-interacting anticancer agents: alkylators, camptothecins, topoisomerase II inhibitors and some antimetabolites. For instance, in the NCI panel, cell lines homozygous for the V432 allele were globally 2-fold resistant to alkylating agents (p = 5×10-10) and to 4.5-fold to camptothecins (p = 6.6×10-9) than cell lines homozygous for the L432 allele. Similar features were exhibited by the JFCR panel: cell lines homozygous for the V432 allele were globally less sensitive to DNA-interfering drugs than cell lines having at least one common allele. There was no significant association between mRNA expression of CYP1B1 and CYP1B1 genotype, and no significant association between CYP1B1 mRNA expression and drug cytotoxicity. These observations open the way to clinical studies exploring the role of CYP1B1 polymorphisms for predicting tumor sensitivity to chemotherapy.
 Lapatinib is a specific Her 1/2 targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitor now widely used in combination with chemotherapy in the clinical setting. This work investigated the interactions between lapatinib and specific chemotherapy agents (cisplatin, SN-38, topotecan,) in a panel of cell lines [breast (n=2), lung (n=2), testis (n=4)]. A high sensitivity cell proliferation/cytotoxicity ATP assay and flow cytometry were used to determine cell viability, apoptosis and the effect of the drugs on cell cycle distribution. Calcusyn analysis was employed to formally identify synergistic interactions between drugs. Intracellular concentrations of SN-38 were measured using a novel HPLC technique. Flow cytometry and HPLC techniques were used to identify the effect of lapatinib on drug influx and efflux pumps using specific substrates and inhibitors of these pumps. Results showed significant synergy between SN-38 and lapatinib was observed in the majority of cell lines (CI <0.75), associated with increased apoptosis. This synergy was not universal, but when observed (SusaS/R, H1975, H358 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines), was related to SN-38 intracellular accumulation (2.2-4.8 fold increase, p<0.05 for each), attributable to the inhibition of the BCRP efflux pump by lapatinib. Flow cytometry analysis showed that Lapatinib (10μM) inhibited the efflux of MXR, a specific substrate of the BCRP pump, in a manner similar to FTC, a known BCRP inhibitor, confirming lapatinib as a BCRP inhibitor. This work shows lapatinib has a direct inhibitory effect on BCRP accounting for the synergistic findings. The synergy is cell line dependent and related to the activity of specific efflux pumps.
 Loss of the PTEN tumor suppressor gene occurs frequently in non-small-cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC), although neither genetic alterations nor epigenetic silencing are significant predictors of PTEN protein levels. Since recent reports implicated neural precursor cell expressed, developmentally down-regulated 4-1 (NEDD4-1) as the E3 ubiquitin ligase that regulates PTEN stability, we investigated the role of NEDD4-1 in the regulation of PTEN expression in cases of NSCLC. Our findings indicate that NEDD4-1 plays a critical role in the development of NSCLC and provides novel insight on the mechanisms that contribute to inactivate PTEN in lung cancer. Immunohistochemical analysis on tissue microarrays containing 103 NSCLC resections revealed NEDD4-1 overexpression in 80% of tumors, which correlated with the loss of PTEN protein (n = 98; P < 0.001). Accordingly, adoptive NEDD4-1 expression in NSCLC cells decreased PTEN protein stability, whereas knock-down of NEDD4-1 expression decreased PTEN ubiquitylation and increased PTEN protein levels. In 25% of cases, NEDD4-1 overexpression was due to gene amplification at 15q21. In addition, manipulation of NEDD4-1 expression in different lung cell systems demonstrated that suppression of NEDD4-1 expression significantly reduced proliferation of NSCLC cells in vitro and tumor growth in vivo, whereas NEDD4-1 overexpression facilitated anchorage-dependent and independent growth in vitro of nontransformed lung epithelial cells that lack pRB and TP53 (BEAS-2B). NEDD4-1 overexpression also augmented the tumorigenicity of lung cancer cells that have an intact PTEN gene (NCI-H460 cells).
 The fact that growth and spread of tumours are dependent on angiogenesis has led to the investigation of the role of anti-angiogenic agents in the therapeutic strategies for thoracic tumours such as nonsmall cell lung cancer or mesotheliomas. Since various angiogenic factors may contribute to the regulation of angiogenesis in the individual tumour, in the era of increasing amounts of clinically tested agents it is of utmost importance to properly select patients that may benefit from a specific therapy. Due to the complex nature of tumour angiogenesis, various biomarkers may be applicable. For example, the profile of activated angiogenic pathways in endothelial cells may be determined in order to make conclusions about the relevance of inhibiting a given pathway by a selected agent. Moreover, changes in protein expression in stromal and tumour cells, as well as structural alterations in the vasculature, may be used for predicting and monitoring the clinical effects of such a therapy. In this review, the current data from clinical studies evaluating predictive markers for anti-angiogenic agents in thoracic cancers are summarised. Besides giving clinical examples, the rationales for investigating various parameters based on pre-clinical studies are described.
 BACKGROUND: Disparities in lung cancer care and outcomes have been documented for blacks and Hispanics. Less is known about the care received by the American Indian and Alaskan Native population (AI/AN). We sought to evaluate lung cancer outcomes in this population and to asses if potential disparities in survival are explained by differences in stage of disease at diagnosis and type of treatment received. METHODS: We identified patients with potentially resectable (stages I-IIIA) non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) from the Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results registry between 1988 and 2006. Kaplan-Meier curves were used to compare survival of AI/AN patients to those of other racial groups. Cox regression analysis was used to identify potential mediators of the association between AI/AN origin and worse survival. RESULTS: Five-year lung cancer survival was 47% for AI/AN, 56% for whites, 51% for blacks, 55% for Hispanics and 59% for individuals of other race (p<0.0001). AI/AN were more likely to be diagnosed with stage IIIA (p<0.0001) and less likely to undergo resection (p<0.0001) than whites. In multivariable regression analyses, controlling for patient characteristics and histology, AI/AN race was associated with worse survival than white patients. When stage, treatment and surgery were added to the model, AI/AN origin was no longer significantly associated with worse outcomes. CONCLUSIONS: AI/AN with potentially resectable NSCLC have survival rates comparable to other minority groups and worse than whites. These survival differences are partly explained by advanced stage at diagnosis, and lower rates of treatment.
 Effective therapy for disseminated metastatic cancer is currently impossible because of low drug accumulation in target sites. Here, we aimed to enhance nanoparticle (NP) targeting to lung melanoma metastases via interactions with the laminin receptor, whose expression is upregulated in metastatic cells. To enable NP follow-up and a framework for targeting ligand binding, Estapor(®) fluorescent NPs (299 ± 6 nm in diameter) with surface carboxylic groups were employed and the laminin receptor binding peptide (YIGSR) was attached to their surface to facilitate targeting. In vitro uptake studies performed under medium flow conditions revealed that the uptake of YIGSR-attached NPs by monolayers of B16 melanoma cells was 2-fold higher compared to the uptake of scrambled peptide-NPs. In cultures of healthy lung cells, the uptake of YIGSR-NPs was low and similar to the uptake of scrambled peptide-NPs. Competition assays using cultured B16 melanoma cells pre-incubated with soluble laminin confirmed that the entry of the YIGSR-modified NPs was mediated via interaction with the laminin receptor. Following intravenous (i.v.) administration into B16 melanoma tumor-bearing mice, targeting of the tumor by the YIGSR-NPs was up to five-fold higher than the scrambled peptide-NPs, with no heart, liver or lung tropism. In an experimental lung metastases model, following i.v. administration the YIGSR-NPs targeted the cancerous metastatic cells in lungs, with nearly no targeting to the healthy lung cells. Collectively, the data indicate that YIGSR-targeted NPs have a potential to be used for systemic delivery of chemotherapeutic drugs for the treatment of metastatic lung cancer.
 PURPOSE: To evaluate the potential for dose escalation with intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) in positron emission tomography-based radiotherapy planning for locally advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (LA-NSCLC). METHODS AND MATERIALS: For 35 LA-NSCLC patients, three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy and IMRT plans were made to a prescription dose (PD) of 66 Gy in 2-Gy fractions. Dose escalation was performed toward the maximal PD using secondary endpoint constraints for the lung, spinal cord, and heart, with de-escalation according to defined esophageal tolerance. Dose calculation was performed using the Eclipse pencil beam algorithm, and all plans were recalculated using a collapsed cone algorithm. The normal tissue complication probabilities were calculated for the lung (Grade 2 pneumonitis) and esophagus (acute toxicity, grade 2 or greater, and late toxicity). RESULTS: IMRT resulted in statistically significant decreases in the mean lung (p <.0001) and maximal spinal cord (p = .002 and 0005) doses, allowing an average increase in the PD of 8.6-14.2 Gy (p ≤.0001). This advantage was lost after de-escalation within the defined esophageal dose limits. The lung normal tissue complication probabilities were significantly lower for IMRT (p <.0001), even after dose escalation. For esophageal toxicity, IMRT significantly decreased the acute NTCP values at the low dose levels (p = .0009 and p <.0001). After maximal dose escalation, late esophageal tolerance became critical (p <.0001), especially when using IMRT, owing to the parallel increases in the esophageal dose and PD. CONCLUSION: In LA-NSCLC, IMRT offers the potential to significantly escalate the PD, dependent on the lung and spinal cord tolerance. However, parallel increases in the esophageal dose abolished the advantage, even when using collapsed cone algorithms. This is important to consider in the context of concomitant chemoradiotherapy schedules using IMRT.
 OBJECTIVE: To analyse the results obtained in the diagnosis and staging of lung cancer (LC) by a Lung Cancer Rapid Diagnosis Unit (LC-RDU) in which real-time endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration (RT-EBUS guided-TBNA) is performed as part of the clinical evaluation of the patient prior to treatment. METHOD: A four year observational study was conducted on a group of patients evaluated due to suspicion of LC in an LC-RDU. The times and the techniques required for the diagnosis and identifying the level of the disease in the initial staging were recorded. RESULTS: Out of a total of 678 patients seen in the LC-RDU, the diagnosis in 352 was confirmed in one or more histopathology samples. In 170 patients (48.2%) the diagnosis was made with biopsies and/ or cytology samples obtained by fibrobronchoscopy, and RT-EBUS guided-TBNA confirmed the clinical suspicion in 70 patients (19.9%). In the 280 patients with SCLC, 166 RT-EBUS guided-TBNA were performed for staging (59.3%), and in 105 of them the technique only showed local disease (37.5%). Therapeutic surgery was performed on 83 of these patients, and was radical in 73 cases (87.9%). CONCLUSION: In half of the patients referred to the LC-RDU due to suspected LC, the diagnosis was confirmed in 75% of cases using endoscopic techniques. RT-EBUS guided-TBNA was the diagnostic technique in 20% of the cases, for staging in more than half of them, and led to reduced waiting times for the diagnosis and starting treatment.
 Biomarker discovery is a typical application from functional genomics. Due to the large number of genes studied simultaneously in microarray data, feature selection is a key step. Swarm intelligence has emerged as a solution for the feature selection problem. However, swarm intelligence settings for feature selection fail to select small features subsets. We have proposed a swarm intelligence feature selection algorithm based on the initialization and update of only a subset of particles in the swarm. In this study, we tested our algorithm in 11 microarray datasets for brain, leukemia, lung, prostate, and others. We show that the proposed swarm intelligence algorithm successfully increase the classification accuracy and decrease the number of selected features compared to other swarm intelligence methods.
 Objective: Few published reports have examined the incidence and outcomes for patients with carcinoid lung tumors. The aim of the current study was to explore incidence, type of surgical treatment given, and outcome for patients with typical (TC) and atypical (AC) lung carcinoids in a national cohort (Norway). Methods: All lung-cancer patients diagnosed in the period 1993-2005 and who were reported to the Cancer Registry of Norway were identified. Biopsies or resection specimens were reviewed and reclassified according to the World Health Organization (WHO) 2004 classification. Surgically treated patients were staged according to the seventh edition of the pathological tumor-node-metastasis (pTNM) staging system. Results: Of 26665 lung cancers registered during the period, 265 (1%) had carcinoid tumors, of which 11 were diagnosed coincidentally at autopsy. In the remaining 254 patients, TCs were found in 188 cases, and ACs were found in 59 cases; seven cases had unclassifiable carcinoids. Of the 217 resected tumors, 173 (80%) were TCs. General surgeons performed 94 resections, including 11 of 17 pneumonectomies. All six bronchial resections were performed by thoracic surgeons. Of the 33 operated patients who died during follow-up, 18 had metastatic carcinoid tumors, of which 10 (56%) were ACs. In 37 non-resected patients (15 with AC and seven with unclassifiable histology), metastatic or locally advanced disease (N=21, 12 of which were ACs) was the main cause of inoperability and death. Five-year survival for all patients was 92% for TC and 66% for AC; for resected patients, the survival rates were 96% and 79%, respectively. Conclusions: Carcinoids are rare malignant tumors and are, in most cases, resectable; the TC subgroup had better prognosis than the AC in univariate analyses. The main cause of death was metastasis/locally advanced tumor at presentation or recurrent disease following resection; both situations were three times more common in patients with AC.
 PURPOSE: The present retrospective study assessed the role of proton beam therapy (PBT) in the treatment of patients with Stage II or III non-small-cell lung cancer who were inoperable or ineligible for chemotherapy because of co-existing disease or refusal. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Between November 2001 and July 2008, PBT was given to 35 patients (5 patients with Stage II, 12 with Stage IIIA, and 18 with Stage IIIB) whose median age was 70.3 years (range, 47.4-85.4). The median proton dose given was 78.3 Gy (range, 67.1-91.3) (relative biologic effectiveness). RESULTS: Local progression-free survival for Stage II-III patients was 93.3% at 1 year and 65.9% at 2 years during a median observation period of 16.9 months. Four patients (11.4%) developed local recurrence, 13 (37.1%) developed regional recurrence, and 7 (20.0%) developed distant metastases. The progression-free survival rate for Stage II-III patients was 59.6% at 1 year and 29.2% at 2 years. The overall survival rate of Stage II-III patients was 81.8% at 1 year and 58.9% at 2 years. Grade 3 or greater toxicity was not observed. A total of 15 patients (42.9%) developed Grade 1 and 6 (17.1%) Grade 2 toxicity. CONCLUSION: PBT for Stage II-III non-small-cell lung cancer without chemotherapy resulted in good local control and low toxicity. PBT has a definite role in the treatment of patients with Stage II-III non-small-cell lung cancer who are unsuitable for surgery or chemotherapy.
 PURPOSE: Currently, prediction of survival for non-small-cell lung cancer patients treated with (chemo)radiotherapy is mainly based on clinical factors. The hypothesis of this prospective study was that blood biomarkers related to hypoxia, inflammation, and tumor load would have an added prognostic value for predicting survival. METHODS AND MATERIALS: Clinical data and blood samples were collected prospectively (NCT00181519, NCT00573040, and NCT00572325) from 106 inoperable non-small-cell lung cancer patients (Stages I-IIIB), treated with curative intent with radiotherapy alone or combined with chemotherapy. Blood biomarkers, including lactate dehydrogenase, C-reactive protein, osteopontin, carbonic anhydrase IX, interleukin (IL) 6, IL-8, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), and cytokeratin fragment 21-1, were measured. A multivariate model, built on a large patient population (N = 322) and externally validated, was used as a baseline model. An extended model was created by selecting additional biomarkers. The model's performance was expressed as the area under the curve (AUC) of the receiver operating characteristic and assessed by use of leave-one-out cross validation as well as a validation cohort (n = 52). RESULTS: The baseline model consisted of gender, World Health Organization performance status, forced expiratory volume, number of positive lymph node stations, and gross tumor volume and yielded an AUC of 0.72. The extended model included two additional blood biomarkers (CEA and IL-6) and resulted in a leave-one-out AUC of 0.81. The performance of the extended model was significantly better than the clinical model (p = 0.004). The AUC on the validation cohort was 0.66 and 0.76, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: The performance of the prognostic model for survival improved markedly by adding two blood biomarkers: CEA and IL-6.
 Lung cancer is one of the most common cancers and, unfortunately, the most deadly. Most patients present either with locally advanced or metastatic disease or develop disease recurrence after local therapies. For these patients, chemotherapy has been the primary treatment but often yields less than optimal results. Recent advances in targeted therapies have raised the promise of improved outcomes for patients. In particular, angiogenesis has been identified as a viable target. Several approaches have been developed, including monoclonal antibodies and tyrosine kinase inhibitors against angiogenic growth factors, particularly vascular endothelial growth factor, and novel vascular disrupting agents. In this review, the role of these antiangiogenic agents in patients with non-small cell lung cancer will be discussed, with an emphasis on bevacizumab and other agents under development and clinical testing (i.e., tyrosine kinase inhibitors and vascular disrupting agents).
 A 52-year-old man with Werner Syndrome (WS) was admitted to our hospital for the treatment of skin ulcers on his thighs. Routine chest radiography revealed an abnormal shadow in the left upper lung field. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a poorly demarcated homogeneous mass (diameter, 4 cm) in the S1 + 2 lung area; no pleural effusion was observed. CT-guided percutaneous needle biopsy revealed the presence of an adenocarcinoma. Other imaging studies did not reveal any lymph-node involvement or presence of metastatic lesions. The patient was diagnosed with stage IB adenocarcinoma (T2N0M0), and a left upper lobectomy was successfully carried out; postoperative wound healing was steady and uneventful, with no obvious ulcer formation. Primary lung cancers very rarely develop in patients with WS; non-epithelial tumors are usually observed in such patients. Patients with WS usually develop severe skin problems, such as refractory skin ulcers in the extremities; however, our patient did not develop any skin-related complications after surgery. As the expected lifespan of patients with WS is increasing, we need to pay attention not only to the rare non-epithelial malignancy, but also cancer. Further, the expected short lifespan of patients with WS, as well as the possibility of skin-related problems after surgery, should not be considered while deciding whether to take the option of surgery in the case of malignancy.
 OBJECTIVES: Photodynamic treatment (PDT) of human lung carcinoma cells A549 (p53(+/+)) and H1299 (p53(-/-)) induces fast but transient stalling of proteasome activity. We have explored the possibility of prolonging this effect by combining PDT with drugs capable of sustaining the stall, and promote apoptosis of surviving cells. We show that aspirin can be used to accomplish this. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Cells were irradiated at doses ranging from 0.54 to 1.10 J cm(-2), and subsequently were incubated with aspirin at either high (10 and 5 mm) or low concentration (2.5 and 1.5 mm). Photofrin concentration and incubation time were constant (2.5 μg/ml and 16 h). Under these conditions, we analysed cell viability, colony-forming efficiency, cycle profile, expression patterns of specific proteins and ubiquitination state, after individual or combined administration. RESULTS: Treatment with either PDT or aspirin, rapidly induced proteasome malfunction and accumulation of cells in G(2)M, but did not induce apoptosis. However, when aspirin was added to cells (even at low concentrations) after PDT, the proteasome block was sustained. Moreover, significant cytotoxic effects, including apoptosis, were observed along with cytostatic effects (G(2)M accumulation/decreased colony formation). CONCLUSIONS: Combination of PDT and low-toxicity drugs (such as aspirin) resulted in protracted inhibition of proteasome activity and induced apoptosis even in apoptosis-resistant cancer cells.
 BACKGROUND: Although a strategy of tidal volume (V(t)) reduction during the one-lung ventilation (OLV) period is advised in thoracic surgery, the influence of the pre-operative respiratory status on the tolerance of this strategy remains unknown. Therefore, the aim of this study was to compare the pulmonary function between chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and healthy-lung patients during the operative and the post-operative period. METHODS: Forty-eight patients undergoing a planned lobectomy for cancer and presenting either a healthy lung function (n=24) or a moderate COPD stage (n=24) were ventilated without external positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) and received 9 ml/kg V(t) during the two-lung ventilation (TLV) period, secondary reduced to 6 ml/kg during the OLV period. Lung function was assessed by peroperative gas exchange, venous admixture, respiratory mechanical parameters and post-operative spirometric measurements. RESULTS: Although the PaO(2) was superior in the healthy-lung group during the TLV, once the OLV was established, no difference was observed between the two groups. Moreover, the PaO(2)/FiO(2) was proportionally more impaired in the healthy-lung group compared with the COPD group (50 ± 13 vs. 72 ± 19% of the baseline values after exclusion and 32 ± 15 vs. 51 ± 25% after the thoracotomy, P<0.05 for each) as well as the venous admixture. In the post-operative period, a higher decrease was observed in the healthy-lung group for the forced vital capacity and the forced expiratory volume. CONCLUSIONS: Reducing V(t) to 6 ml/kg without the adjunction of external PEEP during OLV is associated with better preservation of lung function in the case of moderate COPD than in the case of healthy-lung status.
 Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a transmembrane protein with cytoplasmic kinase activity that transduces important growth factor signaling from the extracellular milieu to the cell. Given that more than 60% of non&#x2013;small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLCs) express EGFR, EGFR has become an important therapeutic target for the treatment of these tumors. Inhibitors that target the kinase domain of EGFR have been developed and are clinically active. More importantly, such tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are especially effective in patients whose tumors harbor activating mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain of the EGFR gene. More recent trials have suggested that for advanced NSCLC patients with EGFR mutant tumors, initial therapy with a TKI instead of chemotherapy may be the best choice of treatment. However, mutation testing is mandatory to identify these patients, given that selection based only on clinico-pathologic characteristics is inadequate. We review the role of EGFR mutations in the diagnosis and management of NSCLC. Expected final online publication date for the Annual Review of Pathology: Mechanisms of Disease Volume 6 is January 24, 2011. Please see http://www.annualreviews.org/catalog/pubdates.aspx for revised estimates.
 OBJECT: The prognosis in patients with a distant spinal metastasis from the lung is dismal. The role of radical surgery in such cases has been questioned because of the excessive morbidity, blood loss, and operative time as well as the tumor's extreme malignancy. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the surgical results and the prognosis associated with radical surgery for lung cancer metastasis to the spine in carefully selected patients and to clarify whether there is an indication for radical surgery such as total en bloc spondylectomy (TES) in lung cancer metastasis. METHODS: The author performed a retrospective review of patients with lung cancer spinal metastasis treated by TES during a 10-year period. Total en bloc spondylectomy for lung cancer metastasis to the spine was performed in 6 patients without visceral or other bony metastases. Outcome measures were prognostic score, mean survival time, and perioperative complications. The histological type was adenocarcinoma in all 6 cases. In 4 cases the surgical strategy prognostic score was 5. In the other 2 cases the score was 6 because there were skip metastases to adjacent vertebra. In the 2 cases with adjacent vertebral metastasis, the adjacent vertebra was excised en bloc together. RESULTS: The mean estimated blood loss was 1076 ml and the mean operative time was 7 hours 20 minutes. Perioperative complications were found in 2 cases. One was deep infection after CSF leakage, and the other was paralysis due to postoperative hematoma. At the end of follow-up period, 4 of 6 patients are still living after a mean of 46.3 months (range 36–62 months). In the other 2 cases, 1 patient died of a heart attack and the other of mediastinitis due to surgical site infection by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. In this series, local recurrence was not found. CONCLUSIONS: Total en bloc spondylectomy has been shown to be associated with excessive morbidity, blood loss, and operative time; however, the procedure is becoming less invasive. The authors conclude that TES is appropriate in selected cases with controllable primary lung cancer, localized spinal metastasis, and no visceral metastasis. In such patients, improvement in the prognosis can be expected after TES. However, even in selected cases and with skilled surgical technique, the complication rate remains high. Total en bloc spondylectomy should be performed after a thorough discussion of the risks and benefits.
 The flavonol quercetin in plants and foods occurs predominantly in the form of glycoside whose sugar moiety affects the bioavailability and the mechanism of its biological activities. The antiproliferative activities of quercetin derivatives such as quercetin aglycone, quercetin-3-β-d-glucoside (Q3G), and rutin were compared using six different cancer cell lines including colon, breast, hepatocellular, and lung cancer. The IC(50) value of Q3G ranged between 15 and 25 μM in HT-29, HCT 116, MCF-7, HepG2, and A549 cells. In these five cell lines, Q3G showed the most potent growth inhibition, whereas rutin showed the least potency. Transformation of rutin to Q3G was conducted by controlling α-l-rhamnosidase and β-d-glucosidase activities from crude enzyme extract of Aspergillus niger . Carbon sources during culture and transformation conditions such as pH, temperature, and heat-stability were optimized. After 4 h biotransformation, 99% of rutin was transformed to Q3G and no quercetin was detected. This study presented an efficient biotransformation for the conversion of rutin to Q3G which was newly shown to have more potent antiproliferative effect than quercetin and rutin.
 BACKGROUND:: The possible effect of pulmonary tuberculosis (TB) on subsequent lung cancer development has been suspected, but the evidence remains inconsistent. The purpose of this study was to perform a nationwide population-based cohort study to investigate the risk of lung cancer after pulmonary TB infection. METHODS:: This nationwide population-based cohort study was based on data obtained from the Taiwan National Health Insurance Database. In total, 5657 TB patients and 23,984 controls matched for age and sex were recruited for the study from 1997 to 2008. RESULTS:: The incidence rate of lung cancer (269 of 100,000 person-years) was significantly higher in the pulmonary TB patients than that in controls (153 of 100,000 person-years) (incidence rate ratio [IRR], 1.76; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.33-2.32; P < .001). Compared with the controls, the IRRs of lung cancer in the TB cohort were 1.98 at 2 to 4 years, 1.42 at 5 to 7 years, and 1.59 at 8 to 12 years after TB infections. The multivariate Cox proportional hazards model revealed pulmonary TB infections (hazard ratio [HR], 1.64; 95% CI, 1.24-2.15; P < .001) and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (HR, 1.09; 95% CI, 1.03-1.14; P = .002) to be independent risk factors for lung cancer. CONCLUSIONS:: Pulmonary infection with TB is associated with an increased risk of lung cancer. Cancer 2010. © 2010 American Cancer Society.
 BACKGROUND:: Although the association of multiple pulmonary metastases, and particularly miliary metastases, with response to gefitinib treatment in patients with nonsmall cell lung cancer has been reported, the association of miliary pulmonary metastases with epidermal growth factor receptor gene (EGFR) mutations remains unclear. METHODS:: The authors retrospectively investigated the association of diffuse, random pulmonary metastases in patients with lung adenocarcinoma. The study included 163 Japanese patients who had unresectable, advanced lung adenocarcinoma diagnosed between April 2003 and March 2010. Computed tomography scans that were obtained at the time of diagnosis were analyzed by 2 investigators. For the purposes of this study, diffuse, random pulmonary metastases were defined as multiple nodules (n = 50; ≤3 cm in greatest dimension) distributed diffusely and randomly throughout the lungs. RESULTS:: Of 163 patients, 55 had pulmonary metastases, and EGFR mutations were detected in 22 of those 55 patients. The mutations were identified preferentially among women (P = .15) and were identified significantly among patients who had a smoking history of <10 pack-years (P = .0057). Diffuse, random pulmonary metastases were identified in 11 of 22 patients who had EGFR mutations and in 4 of 33 patients who had the wild-type EGFR (P = .0043). On the basis of multivariate analyses, EGFR mutations were associated independently with a smoking history of <10 pack-years (P = .026) and with diffuse, random pulmonary metastases (P = .012). CONCLUSIONS:: When patients with lung adenocarcinomas who had EGFR mutations developed pulmonary metastases, they tended to be diffuse and random, including military metastases. However, such metastases were much less common in patients who had lung adenocarcinomas with wild-type EGFR. Cancer 2010. © 2010 American Cancer Society.
 Arg72Pro is a common polymorphism in TP53, showing differences in its biological functions. Case-control studies have been performed to elucidate the role of Arg72Pro in cancer, although the results are conflicting and heterogeneous. Here, we analysed pooled data from case-control studies to determine the role of Arg72Pro in different cancer sites. We performed a systematic review and meta-analysis of 302 case-control studies that analysed Arg72Pro in cancer susceptibility. Odds ratios (ORs) were estimated for different tumour sites using distinct genetic models, and the heterogeneity between studies was explored using I(2) values and meta-regression. We adopted quality criteria to classify the studies. Subgroup analyses were done for tumour sites according to ethnicity, the histological and anatomical sites. Results indicated that Arg72Pro is associated with higher susceptibility to cancer in some tumour sites, mainly hepatocarcinoma. For some tumour sites, quality of studies was associated with the size of genetic association, mainly in cervical, head and neck, gastric and lung cancer. However, study quality did not explain the observed heterogeneity substantially. Meta-regression showed that ethnicity, allelic frequency and genotyping method were responsible for a substantial part of the heterogeneity observed. Our results suggest ethnicity and histological and anatomical sites may modulate the penetrance of Arg72Pro in cancer susceptibility. This meta-analysis denotes the importance for more studies with good quality and that the covariates responsible for heterogeneity should be controlled to obtain a more conclusive response about the function of Arg72Pro in cancer.
 OBJECTIVES: In this study, we investigated prognostic factors associated with survival after distantly metastatic recurrence in surgically resected non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and clarified the influence of local treatment on the prognosis for oligometastatic recurrence. METHODS: From 1994 through 2004, 418 consecutive patients with NSCLC underwent complete resection; 138 experienced a postoperative recurrence by December 2005. Of those, we reviewed 93 patients with only distant metastases for clinicopathological information, treatment modality, and survival. RESULTS: For the 93 patients with distant metastasis alone, the 2- and 5-year survival rates after recurrence were 43.9% and 38.7%, respectively. Of those patients, 44 first received local treatment, including radiotherapy in 31 and a surgical resection in 13. Their recurrent disease (oligometastases) was limited with the potential to be controlled with local treatment. The targeted metastatic organs were brain in 14 patients, bone in 14, lungs in 12, and other organs in 4. Significant prognostic factors for postrecurrence survival included adenocarcinoma histology, long disease-free interval (DFI) (1 year or longer), and the performance of local treatment for oligometastases. CONCLUSION: Local therapy such as radiotherapy and surgery, might be considered first-line treatment in patients with postoperative oligometastatic recurrence, especially those with a DFI ≥ 1 year. J. Surg. Oncol. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
 BACKGROUND: Knowledge was gathered on occupational demands and health effects of two occupations in the construction industry, bricklayers and supervisors, in order to design a job-specific workers' health surveillance (WHS) for construction workers. METHODS: We systematically searched MEDLINE, EMBASE, PsycINFO, HSELINE, NIOSHTIC-2, and Picarta up to December 2008. RESULTS: A total of 60 articles were included. Evidence was found for the following demands for bricklayers: energetic load (exceeding 25% heart rate reserve), load on the lower back (exceeding the NIOSH-threshold value of 3.4 kN), repetitive force exertions of the upper extremities, frequent bending with trunk flexion exceeding 60° and working with the arms more than 60° elevated. Environmental demands include: dust and quartz exposure (exceeding the limit values of 3.0 and 0.05 mg/m(3), respectively), vibration and noise (exceeding the limit value of 80 dBA). Bricklayers are at increased risk of lung cancer, low back pain, complaints of arms and legs and getting injuries. Among construction supervisors are walking and standing common physically demanding activities. Psychosocial demands with evidence for supervisors were mental demands, workload, time pressure, working long hours, and social-organizational factors. Supervisors are at increased risk of lung cancer and injuries. CONCLUSIONS: For bricklayers evidence was found for physical demands and risk on low back pain and complaints of arms and legs, for construction supervisors on psychosocial demands. Both occupations are at increased risk of lung cancer and injuries. Job-specific demands and health effects should be incorporated in WHS for construction workers. Am. J. Ind. Med. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
 BACKGROUND: Aspartame (APM) is a well-known intense artificial sweetener used in more than 6,000 products. Among the major users of aspartame are children and women of childbearing age. In previous lifespan experiments conducted on Sprague-Dawley rats we have shown that APM is a carcinogenic agent in multiple sites and that its effects are increased when exposure starts from prenatal life. OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to evaluate the potential of APM to induce carcinogenic effects in mice. METHODS: Six groups of 62-122 male and female Swiss mice were treated with APM in feed at doses of 32,000, 16,000, 8,000, 2,000, or 0 ppm from prenatal life (12 days of gestation) until death. At death each animal underwent complete necropsy and all tissues and organs of all animals in the experiment were microscopically examined. RESULTS: APM in our experimental conditions induces in males a significant dose-related increased incidence of hepatocellular carcinomas (P < 0.01), and a significant increase at the dose levels of 32,000 ppm (P < 0.01) and 16,000 ppm (P < 0.05). Moreover, the results show a significant dose-related increased incidence of alveolar/bronchiolar carcinomas in males (P < 0.05), and a significant increase at 32,000 ppm (P < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: The results of the present study confirm that APM is a carcinogenic agent in multiple sites in rodents, and that this effect is induced in two species, rats (males and females) and mice (males). No carcinogenic effects were observed in female mice. Am. J. Ind. Med. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
 PURPOSE: The present review is aimed to introduce an new occupational lung disease, Indium Lung. METHODS: We searched case reports and epidemiological studies concerning indium-related lung diseases and reviewed. RESULTS: Up to March, 2010, 7 cases of interstitial pneumonia in Japanese indium-exposed workers, two cases of pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP) in US indium-exposed workers, one case of PAP in a Chinese indium-exposed worker, and 4 cross-sectional surveys in Japan had been published. All cases and epidemiological studies in Japan indicate that exposure to hardly soluble indium compounds causes interstitial as well as emphysematous lung damages, which we call "Indium Lung". Based on the epidemiological studies, the Japan Society for Occupational Health proposed 3 μg/l of indium in serum as an occupational exposure limit based on biological monitoring to prevent significant increase of KL-6. COMMENTS: Long-term follow-up of currently and formerly indium-exposed workers is essential not only to clarify the natural history of indium lung but also to trace the incidence of lung cancer. It is also necessary to elucidate the mechanism of indium lung and difference in clinical manifestations between Japanese and US cases.
 PURPOSE: Despite decades of experimental and observational studies, the carcinogenic risks to humans associated with occupational exposure to perchloroethylene (PER) remain uncertain. The aims of the present study were to further examine the possible associations. METHODS: A national cohort of dry-cleaning and laundry workers (n = 10,389) assembled in 1984 was followed up for new cases of cancer by matching with the Swedish cancer register from 1985 to 2006 (inclusive), and the results were compared with expected frequencies derived from national reference data. RESULTS: Follow-up was complete for 90.9% of the cohort (2,810 men, 6,630 women). The overall standardised cancer incidence ratio (SIR) for all subjects was close to unity (SIR 0.96; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.91-1.02) with a slightly more favourable outcome in women (SIR 0.91; 95% CI 0.85-0.98) than in men (SIR 1.10; 95% CI 0.99-1.23). Significantly elevated rates of lung cancer (SIR 1.45; 95% CI 1.03-1.98) and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (SIR 2.05; 95% CI 1.30-3.07) were seen in men, but for both types of cancer, the point estimates were similar in genuine laundry workers and dry-cleaners exposed to PER, respectively. There was no significant excess of cancer of the oesophagus, larynx, uterine cervix, liver, kidney or urinary bladder. CONCLUSIONS: The absence of individual or collective data on PER exposure from participating dry-cleaning shops and laundries involved and limited information on exposure time hampered the risk assessment related to PER. However, no clear association between PER exposure and subsequent cancer morbidity in the workers was evident from this historically prospective cohort.
 The aim of this study was to describe 2 years cancer survivors' perception of the cancer risk running in their family, and to describe how frequently these survivors recommended cancer screening to their relatives. A national cross-sectional survey was launched by the French Ministry of Health to investigate the living conditions of adult cancer patients 2 years after cancer diagnosis. Among the 13,923 patients identified, 6,957 were eligible to participate in this study and 4460 (64.1%) answered the questionnaire administered by telephone. One participant out of every two (50.8%) reported that they thought their relatives' risk of cancer was greater than that of the relatives of unaffected persons. Higher percentages were recorded among breast and colorectal cancer patients (65 and 65.1%, respectively), and lower percentages among those with lung and hematological cancer (34.9 and 28.4%, respectively). Overall, 61.1% of the participants had already advised relatives to undergo cancer screening and 10.4% planned to do so. Eighty-one percent of the participants with breast cancer and 76.3% of those with colorectal cancer said they had advised relatives to undergo screening. Lower percentages were obtained among patients with urinary tract (41.7%) and hematological malignancies (27.1%). Although patients' perceptions tend to fit the latest data on the frequency of cancer germline mutations, physicians should help their patients to convey more accurate advice to their families. If survivors were better informed, they could play a critical role by conveying relevant and sound risk reduction messages to their relatives.
 BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to determine the smallest changes in health-related quality of life (HRQOL) scores in a subset of the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire core 30 (EORTC QLQ-C30) scales, which could be considered as clinically meaningful in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). METHODS: WHO performance status (PS) and weight change were used as clinical anchors to determine minimal important differences (MIDs) in HRQOL change scores (range, 0-100) in the EORTC QLQ-C30 scales. Selected distribution-based methods were used for comparison. FINDINGS: In a pooled dataset of 812 NSCLC patients undergoing treatment, the values determined to represent the MID depended on whether patients were improving or deteriorating. MID estimates for improvement (based on a one-category change in PS, 5 - <20% weight gain) were physical functioning (9, 5); role functioning (14, 7); social functioning (5, 7); global health status (9, 4); fatigue (14, 5); and pain (16, 2). The respective MID estimates for deterioration (based on PS, weight loss) were physical (4, 6); role (5, 5); social (7, 9); global health status (4, 4); fatigue (6, 11); and pain (3, 7). INTERPRETATION: Based on the selected QLQ-C30 scales, the MID may depend upon whether the patients' PS is improving or worsening, but our results are not definitive. The MID estimates for the specified scales can help clinicians and researchers evaluate the significance of changes in HRQOL and assess the value of a health care intervention or compare treatments. The estimates also can be useful in determining sample sizes in the design of future clinical trials.
 BACKGROUND: The mechanical properties of the extracellular matrix have an important role in cell growth and differentiation. However, it is unclear as to what extent cancer cells respond to changes in the mechanical properties (rigidity/stiffness) of the microenvironment and how this response varies among cancer cell lines. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study we used a recently developed 96-well plate system that arrays extracellular matrix-conjugated polyacrylamide gels that increase in stiffness by at least 50-fold across the plate. This plate was used to determine how changes in the rigidity of the extracellular matrix modulate the biological properties of tumor cells. The cell lines tested fall into one of two categories based on their proliferation on substrates of differing stiffness: "rigidity dependent" (those which show an increase in cell growth as extracellular rigidity is increased), and "rigidity independent" (those which grow equally on both soft and stiff substrates). Cells which grew poorly on soft gels also showed decreased spreading and migration under these conditions. More importantly, seeding the cell lines into the lungs of nude mice revealed that the ability of cells to grow on soft gels in vitro correlated with their ability to grow in a soft tissue environment in vivo. The lung carcinoma line A549 responded to culture on soft gels by expressing the differentiated epithelial marker E-cadherin and decreasing the expression of the mesenchymal transcription factor Slug. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These observations suggest that the mechanical properties of the matrix environment play a significant role in regulating the proliferation and the morphological properties of cancer cells. Further, the multiwell format of the soft-plate assay is a useful and effective adjunct to established 3-dimensional cell culture models.
 Platinum-containing chemotherapy agents (cisplatin, carboplatin, oxaliplatin) have been approved in the first-line setting of numerous malignancies, such as ovarian, bladder, head and neck, colorectal, and lung cancer. Their extensive use over the last decade has led to a significant increase in the incidence of hypersensitivity reactions, which are defined as unforeseen reactions whose signs and symptoms cannot be explained by the known toxicity of these drugs. Skin rash, flushing, abdominal cramping, itchy palms, and back pain are common symptoms. Cardiovascular and respiratory complications can prove fatal. Multiple pathogenetic mechanisms have been suggested. Hypersensitivity usually appears after multiple infusions, suggesting type I allergic reactions; however, other types of hypersensitivity also seem to be implicated. Several management options are available to treating physicians: discontinuation of chemotherapy, premedication, prolonging of infusion duration, desensitization protocols, and replacement with a different platinum compound after performing skin tests that rule out cross-reactions among platinum agents.
 AZD6244 (ARRY-142886) is an inhibitor of MEK1/2 and can inhibit cell proliferation or induce apoptosis in a cell-type dependent manner. The precise molecular mechanism of AZD6244-induced apoptosis is not clear. To investigate mechanisms of AZD6244 induced apoptosis in human lung cancer, we determined the molecular changes of two subgroups of human lung cancer cell lines that are either sensitive or resistant to AZD6244 treatment. We found that AZD6244 elicited a large increase of Bim proteins and a smaller increase of PUMA and NOXA proteins, and induced cell death in sensitive lung cancer cell lines, but had no effect on other Bcl-2 related proteins in those cell lines. Knockdown of Bim by siRNA greatly increased the IC(50) and reduced apoptosis for AZD6244 treated cells. We also found that levels of endogenous p-Thr32-FOXO3a and p-Ser253-FOXO3a were lower in AZD6244-sensitive cells than in AZD6244-resistant cells. In the sensitive cells, AZD6244 induced FOXO3a nuclear translocation required for Bim activation. Moreover, the silencing of FOXO3a by siRNA abrogated AZD6244-induced cell apoptosis. In addition, we found that transfection of constitutively active AKT up-regulated p-Thr32-FOXO3a and p-Ser253-FOXO3a expression and inhibited AZD6244-induced Bim expression in sensitive cells. These results show that Bim plays an important role in AZD6244-induced apoptosis in lung cancer cells and that the PI3K/AKT/FOXO3a pathway is involved in Bim regulation and susceptibility of lung cancer cells to AZD6244. These results have implications in the development of strategies to overcome resistance to MEK inhibitors.
 By dual labeling a targeting moiety with both nuclear and optical probes, the ability for noninvasive imaging and intraoperative guidance may be possible. Herein, the ability to detect metastasis in an immunocompetent animal model of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER-2)-positive cancer metastases using positron emission tomography (PET) and near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence imaging is demonstrated. METHODS: ((64)Cu-DOTA)(n)-trastuzumab-(IRDye800)(m) was synthesized, characterized, and administered to female Balb/c mice subcutaneously inoculated with highly metastatic 4T1.2neu/R breast cancer cells. ((64)Cu-DOTA)(n)-trastuzumab-(IRDye800)(m) (150 µg, 150 µCi, m = 2, n = 2) was administered through the tail vein at weeks 2 and 6 after implantation, and PET/computed tomography and NIR fluorescence imaging were performed 24 hours later. Results were compared with the detection capabilities of F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose ((18)FDG-PET). RESULTS: Primary tumors were visualized with (18)FDG and ((64)Cu-DOTA)(n)-trastuzumab-(IRDye800)(m), but resulting metastases were identified only with the dual-labeled imaging agent. (64)Cu-PET imaging detected lung metastases, whereas ex vivo NIR fluorescence showed uptake in regions of lung, skin, skeletal muscle, and lymph nodes, which corresponded with the presence of cancer cells as confirmed by histologic hematoxylin and eosin stains. In addition to detecting the agent in lymph nodes, the high signal-to-noise ratio from NIR fluorescence imaging enabled visualization of channels between the primary tumor and the axillary lymph nodes, suggesting a lymphatic route for trafficking cancer cells. Because antibody clearance occurs through the liver, we could not distinguish between nonspecific uptake and liver metastases. CONCLUSION: ((64)Cu-DOTA)(n)-trastuzumab-(IRDye800)(m) may be an effective diagnostic imaging agent for staging HER-2-positive breast cancer patients and intraoperative resection.
 In an attempt to develop better therapeutic approaches for metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC), the combination of the antiangiogenic drug sunitinib with gemcitabine was studied. Using dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (DCE-MRI), we have previously determined that a sunitinib dosage of 20 mg/kg per day increased kidney tumor perfusion and decreased vascular permeability in a preclinical murine RCC model. This sunitinib dosage causing regularization of tumor vessels was selected to improve delivery of gemcitabine to the tumor. DCE-MRI was used to monitor regularization of vasculature with sunitinib in kidney tumors to schedule gemcitabine. We established an effective and nontoxic schedule of sunitinib combined with gemcitabine consisting of pretreatment with sunitinib for 3 days followed by four treatments of gemcitabine at 20 mg/kg given 3 days apart while continuing daily sunitinib treatment. This treatment caused significant tumor growth inhibition resulting in small residual tumor nodules exhibiting giant tumor cells with degenerative changes, which were observed both in kidney tumors and in spontaneous lung metastases, suggesting a systemic antitumor response. The combined therapy caused a significant increase in mouse survival. DCE-MRI monitoring of vascular changes induced by sunitinib, gemcitabine, and both combined showed increased tumor perfusion and decreased vascular permeability in kidney tumors. These findings, confirmed histologically by thinning of tumor blood vessels, suggest that both sunitinib and gemcitabine exert antiangiogenic effects in addition to cytotoxic antitumor activity. These studies show that DCE-MRI can be used to select the dose and schedule of antiangiogenic drugs to schedule chemotherapy and improve its efficacy.
 Following the identification of a set of hypoxia-regulated microRNAs (miRNAs), recent studies have highlighted the importance of miR-210 and of its transcriptional regulation by the transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1). We report here that miR-210 is overexpressed at late stages of non-small cell lung cancer. Expression of miR-210 in lung adenocarcinoma A549 cells caused an alteration of cell viability associated with induction of caspase-3/7 activity. miR-210 induced a loss of mitochondrial membrane potential and the apparition of an aberrant mitochondrial phenotype. The expression profiling of cells overexpressing miR-210 revealed a specific signature characterized by enrichment for transcripts related to 'cell death' and 'mitochondrial dysfunction', including several subunits of the electron transport chain (ETC) complexes I and II. The transcript coding for one of these ETC components, SDHD, subunit D of succinate dehydrogenase complex (SDH), was validated as a bona fide miR-210 target. Moreover, SDHD knockdown mimicked miR-210-mediated mitochondrial alterations. Finally, miR-210-dependent targeting of SDHD was able to activate HIF-1, in line with previous studies linking loss-of-function SDH mutations to HIF-1 activation. miR-210 can thus regulate mitochondrial function by targeting key ETC component genes with important consequences on cell metabolism, survival and modulation of HIF-1 activity. These observations help explain contradictory data regarding miR-210 expression and its putative function in solid tumors.Cell Death and Differentiation advance online publication, 1 October 2010; doi:10.1038/cdd.2010.119.
 BACKGROUND:: Cancer survivorship following cancer treatment is uncertain as physical and psychological sequelae related to the disease or its treatment may persist. However, little is known about the experience of symptoms after treatment. OBJECTIVES:: The purposes of this study were to (1) examine postchemotherapy (post-CTX) symptom trajectories in cancer survivors and (2) determine whether demographic characteristics predicted symptom trajectories. METHODS:: One hundred patients who recently completed CTX for lung cancer, colorectal cancer, or lymphoma rated symptoms on an electronic patient care monitor system prior to ambulatory care visits. Latent growth curve analyses were conducted to examine the trajectories of pain, fatigue, sleep disturbance, distress, and depression for 16 months after initial CTX. RESULTS:: Symptoms were present at the first follow-up visit following CTX (P <.0001) and persisted over 16 months. The depression trajectory was predicted by sex: males showed a convex curvilinear growth trajectory, whereas females showed a concave trajectory (P <.05). Higher distress was predicted by younger age (P <.05). CONCLUSIONS:: Psychological and physical symptoms persisted over the 16-month period following CTX for the entire sample. Sex differences in coping could partially explain the different trajectories of growth for depression, but further studies are warranted. Younger patients may be more vulnerable for distress during this posttreatment phase. IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE:: The posttreatment surveillance plan for cancer survivors should include a comprehensive assessment of psychological and physical symptoms. Persistence of symptoms can be expected in some patients, and supportive interventions should be tailored according to symptom reports.
 Silica and asbestos cause pneumoconioses known as silicosis and asbestosis, respectively, that are each characterized by progressive pulmonary fibrosis. On the other hand, silicosis patients often suffer from a type of immunological dysregulation that gives rise to autoimmunity. These epidemiological findings suggest that silica may affect the immune system in humans. In addition, as asbestos itself is a mineral silicate, it may possess generalized immunotoxicological effects similar to those associated with silica particles. Because asbestos-exposed patients are well-known to often develop malignant diseases such as lung cancer and mesothelioma, one silica-like dysregulatory outcome that needs to be considered (apart from autoimmunity) is an alteration in host tumor immunity. In this review, the immunotoxicological effects of both silica and asbestos are presented and discussed in terms of immune system dysregulation as manifested by the onset of autoimmunity or alterations in host tumor immunity.
 Malignant pleural effusion (MPE) accompanying lung adenocarcinoma indicates poor prognosis and early metastasis. This study aimed to identify genes related to MPE formation. Three tissue sample cohorts - seven from healthy lungs, 18 from stage I-III lung adenocarcinoma with adjacent healthy lung tissue, and 13 from lung adenocarcinomas with MPE were analysed by oligonucleotide microarray. The identified genes were verified by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), immunohistochemical staining, and immunofluorescence confocal microscopy. Twenty up- or down-regulated genes with a two-fold change in MPE cancer cells compared to healthy tissues were differentially expressed from early- to late-stage lung cancer. Of 13 genes related to cellular metabolism, aldolase A (ALDOA), sorbitol dehydrogenase (SORD), transketolase (TKT), and tuberous sclerosis 1 (TSC1) were related to glucose metabolism. QRT-PCR validated their mRNA expressions in pleural metastatic samples. Immunohistochemical staining confirmed aberrant TKT, ALDOA, and TSC1 expressions in tumour cells. Immunofluorescence confirmed TKT co-localization and co-distribution of ALDOA with thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) positive cancer cells. TKT regulated the proliferation, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) secretion in vitro and in vivo vascular permeability of cancer cell. Glucose metabolic reprogramming by ALDOA, SORD, TKT, and TSC1 is important in MPE pathogenesis.
 PURPOSE: Our hypothesis was that pretreatment inflammation in the lung makes pulmonary tissue more susceptible to radiation damage. The relationship between pretreatment [(18)F]fluorodeoxyglucose ([(18)F]FDG) uptake in the lungs (as a surrogate for inflammation) and the delivered radiation dose and radiation-induced lung toxicity (RILT) was investigated. METHODS AND MATERIALS: We retrospectively studied a prospectively obtained cohort of 101 non-small-cell lung cancer patients treated with (chemo)radiation therapy (RT). [(18)F]FDG-positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scans used for treatment planning were studied. Different parameters were used to describe [(18)F]FDG uptake patterns in the lungs, excluding clinical target volumes, and the interaction with radiation dose. An increase in the dyspnea grade of 1 (Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 3.0) or more points compared to the pre-RT score was used as an endpoint for analysis of RILT. The effect of [(18)F]FDG and CT-based variables, dose, and other patient or treatment characteristics that effected RILT was studied using logistic regression. RESULTS: Increased lung density and pretreatment [(18)F]FDG uptake were related to RILT after RT with univariable logistic regression. The 95th percentile of the [(18)F]FDG uptake in the lungs remained significant in multivariable logistic regression (p = 0.016; odds ratio [OR] = 4.3), together with age (p = 0.029; OR = 1.06), and a pre-RT dyspnea score of ≥1 (p = 0.005; OR = 0.20). Significant interaction effects were demonstrated among the 80th, 90th, and 95th percentiles and the relative lung volume receiving more than 2 and 5 Gy. CONCLUSIONS: The risk of RILT increased with the 95th percentile of the [(18)F]FDG uptake in the lungs, excluding clinical tumor volume (OR = 4.3). The effect became more pronounced as the fraction of the 5%, 10%, and 20% highest standardized uptake value voxels that received more than 2 Gy to 5 Gy increased. Therefore, the risk of RILT may be decreased by applying sophisticated radiotherapy techniques to avoid areas in the lung with high [(18)F]FDG uptake.
 PURPOSE: At Kagawa University Hospital we conduct immediate cytology using ultrafast Papanicolaou (U-Pap) stain when collecting cytology specimens by bronchoscopy or CT-guided needle aspiration, and report here an investigation of its utility. METHODS: The subjects were 503 patients for whom a final histopathological diagnosis could be made, taken from among 568 immediate cytology patients between July 2000 and June 2008. In immediate cytology at our hospital, a cytotechnologist goes to the bronchoscopy room just before tissue is collected. U-Pap stain is done immediately and examined microscopically. A tentative report is made orally on the spot as to the specimen adequacy, whether it is benign or malignant, and the presumed histopathological type. RESULTS: Of the 503 patients, the sample was inadequate in only two cases and there were no false positives. With respect to diagnostic accuracy, sensitivity was 82.9%, specificity was 100%, and the correct diagnosis rate was 85.6%. For lesions ≤3cm, sensitivity was 77.2%, specificity was 100%, and the correct diagnosis rate was 81.3%, and for lesions ≤2cm sensitivity was 74.7%, specificity was 100%, and the correct diagnosis rate was 81.3%. Diagnostic accuracy was thus maintained even for small lesions. No false positive case was detected. CONCLUSION: Because immediate cytology enables more precise sample collection, it is thought to be a useful technique that leads to improved diagnostic accuracy, while also improving the technical skill of the doctor collecting samples through immediate feedback.
 PURPOSE: The objective of this study was to evaluate the major factors influencing on FDG uptake in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) by investigating histological difference in the expression of glucose transporters 1 and 3 (Glut-1 and Glut-3) and tumour size. METHODS: This study enrolled 32 patients including 9 with squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and 23 with adenocarcinoma (AC). The AC cases comprised 16 AC with mixed subtypes (AC-mixed) and 7 localized AC in situ (localized bronchioloalveolar carcinoma). Partial volume effect corrected maximum standardized uptake values (cSUVmax) and tumour size were obtained using FDG PET/CT. Glut-1 and Glut-3 expression were evaluated using five-point grading scales. RESULTS: Overexpression of Gluts was observed at high rates (88% for Glut-1 and 97% for Glut-3). They were mutually correlated. cSUVmax showed better correlation with size than with Gluts overexpression. AC and SCC showed a high positive expression rate for both Glut-1 and Glut-3, although the degree of overexpression was significantly higher in SCC than AC. In addition, localized AC in situ revealed a considerably higher positive expression rate and similar degrees of overexpression for both Glut-1 and Glut-3 compared with AC-mixed. By contrast, localized AC in situ alone was significantly smaller in both cSUVmax and size than either SCC or AC-mixed. No significant difference was found in cSUVmax or size between SCC and AC-mixed. CONCLUSIONS: The FDG uptake of NSCLC might be dependent on size rather than on overexpression of Glut-1 or Glut-3. Low FDG uptake in localized AC in situ might result from its small size rather than Glut overexpression.
 Primary salivary gland-type lung cancer is rare, and little is known about the role of surgery. The aim of this study was to analyze surgical role and outcome for primary salivary gland-type lung cancer. Between October 1995 and June 2008, 48 patients underwent surgical treatment for primary salivary gland-type lung cancer. Medical records were analyzed for age, sex, tumor histopathology, location, surgical resection, tumor grade, clinical outcome, and survival. There were 31 male and 17 female patients, with an average age of 41.1±15.2 years. Mucoepidermoid carcinoma was diagnosed in 26 patients, adenoid cystic carcinoma was diagnosed in 20 patients, and epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma was diagnosed in 2 patients. The operative procedure included (bi) lobectomy (n=15, 31.2%), sleeve lobectomy (n=13, 27.1%), tracheal resection (n=8, 16.7%), pneumonectomy (n=7, 14.6%), and carinal resection (n=5, 10.4%). There was no operative mortality, and minor morbidity occurred in eight patients. Incomplete resection occurred in eight patients, and six of them received postoperative radiotherapy. Of incompletely resected patients, cancer recurrence was found in three patients, and all were in the adjuvant radiotherapy group. Overall, cancer recurred in 11 patients (22.9%), and 4 of them were treated by repeated surgical resection and were alive and disease-free at the conclusion of this study. The overall 5-year and 10-year survival rates after operation were 97.6 and 86.7%. Surgical resection of primary salivary gland-type lung cancer was an effective treatment with low operative morbidity, and expected long-term survival. Repeated surgical resection may be considered an effective treatment modality in some cases of recurrence.
 BACKGROUND: Minichromosome maintenance (MCM) proteins 2-7 form a complex essential for the initiation of DNA replication. In the process to screen expression changes related to growth suppression of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells by a cJun dominant-negative mutant, we found that reduced expression of MCM4 was correlated with this growth suppression. METHOD: We determined the relevance of MCM4 in proliferation of NSCLC by downregulating its expression with small-interfering RNA in three NSCLC cell lines. We then immunohistochemically analyzed MCM4 expression in 156 surgically resected NSCLCs to correlate clinicopathologic characteristics. RESULTS: MCM4 downregulation reduced proliferation in two cell lines. MCM4 expression was higher in cancer cells than in adjacent normal bronchial epithelial cells (p<0.001). High MCM4 expression was correlated with male gender, heavy smoking, poorer differentiation and non-adenocarcinoma histology (p<0.001, respectively). High MCM4 expression was also correlated with proliferation markers, Ki-67 and cyclin E expression (p<0.001, respectively). MCM4 expression was not associated with survival. CONCLUSION: MCM4 may play an essential role in the proliferation of some NSCLC cells. Taken together with higher expression in NSCLCs and its correlation with clinicopathologic characteristics such as non-adenocarcinoma histology, MCM4 may have potential as a therapeutic target in certain population with NSCLCs.
 Hesperidin is a naturally occurring flavonoid that has been reported to possess anticancer effects. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the effect of hesperidin in modulating the expressions of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), mast cells (MCs) and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) during benzo(a)pyrene (B(a)P) induced lung carcinogenesis in mice. B(a)P (50mg/kg body weight) induced animals showed increased mast cell density (MCD) as revealed by toluidine blue staining and severe expression of COX-2 along with upregulated expression of MMP-2 and MMP-9 as revealed by Western blotting and immunohistochemistry. Supplementation of hesperidin (25mg/kg body weight) to lung cancer bearing mice attenuated MCD and downregulated the expressions of COX-2, MMP-2 and MMP-9. These observations show that hesperidin exerts its anti-carcinogenic activity against lung cancer by altering the expressions of COX-2, MMP-2 and MMP-9.
 Aim:  Current classification systems of large bowel cancer only refer to metastatic disease as M0, M1 or Mx. Recurrent colorectal cancer primarily occurs in the liver, lungs, nodes or peritoneum. The management of each of these sites of recurrence has made significant advances and each is a subspecialty in its own right. The aim of this paper was to devise a classification system which accurately describes the site and extent of metastatic spread. Method:  An amendment of the current system is proposed in which liver, lung and peritoneal metastases are annotated by 'Liv 0,1', 'Pul 0,1' and 'Per 0,1' in describing the primary presentation. These are then subclassified taking into account the chronology, size, number and geographical distribution of metastatic disease or logoregional recurrence and its K-Ras status. Conclusion:  This discussion document proposes a classification system which is logical and simple to use. We plan to validate it prospectively.
 Asia needs a guideline for non-small-cell lung cancer because of differences in medical care, medical care insurance, ethnic variation and drug approval lag within Asian countries and compared with Western countries. Due to ethnic differences, drug dosages are often higher in the USA than in Japan. EGFR mutation in non-small-cell lung cancer was detected in 32% of Asians but only 6% of non-Asians, while differences in irinotecan metabolism cause higher frequencies of toxicity (leukopenia, diarrhea) in Asians. Pharmacodynamic ethnic differences in relation to paclitaxel/carboplatin resulted in longer median survival and a higher 1-year survival rate for Japanese-advanced non-small-cell lung cancer patients compared with Americans. To solve the problem of drug lag, pharmaceutical companies must perform multinational Asian clinical trials with quick accrual of patients, while regulatory authorities must establish high-quality, efficient approval processes, and achieve regulatory harmonization. The National Comprehensive Cancer Network promotes creation of national clinical practice guidelines, and Korea, China and Thailand adapted the National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines. Many Asian countries still lack such guidelines, and there are no pan-Asian guidelines for non-small-cell lung cancer. Japan developed its own non-small-cell lung cancer guidelines and also a gefitinib guidance. The study group members concluded that immediate establishment of an Asian non-small-cell lung cancer guideline will be difficult because of the differences among the countries. Asian collaborative trials on treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer need to be started at an early date to generate Asian data.
 Disseminating tumors are one of the gravest medical problems. Here, we combine the tumor-specific apoptosis-inducing activity of TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) with the ability of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) to infiltrate both tumor and lymphatic tissues to target primary tumors as well as disseminated cancer cells in a human pancreatic cancer mouse model. Furthermore, we targeted XIAP by RNAi inside the cancer cells to make use of the apoptosis sensitization as well the anti-metastatic effect that is afforded by XIAP silencing.We generated MSCs, termed MSC.sTRAIL, that express and secrete a trimeric form of soluble TRAIL (sTRAIL). MSC.sTRAIL triggered limited apoptosis in human pancreatic carcinoma cells that were resistant to soluble recombinant TRAIL, which is most likely due to the enhanced effect of the direct, cell mediated delivery of trimeric TRAIL. MSC.sTRAIL-mediated cell death was markedly increased by concomitant knockdown of XIAP by RNAi in the cancer cells. These findings were confirmed in xenograft models, in which tumors from the parental pancreatic carcinoma cells showed only growth retardation upon treatment with MSC.sTRAIL, whereas tumors with silenced XIAP that were treated with MSC.sTRAIL went into remission. Moreover, animals with XIAP-negative xenografts treated with MSC.sTRAIL were almost free of lung metastasis, whereas animals treated with control MSCs showed substantial metastatic growth in the lungs. In summary, this is the first demonstration that a combined approach using systemic MSC-mediated delivery of sTRAIL together with XIAP inhibition suppresses metastatic growth of pancreatic carcinoma.
 PURPOSE: This study aims to describe emotional distress and quality of life (QoL) of patients at different phases of their lung cancer and the association with their family physician (FP) involvement. METHODS: A prospective study on patients with lung cancer was conducted in three regions of Quebec, Canada. Patients completed, at baseline, several validated questionnaires regarding their psychosocial characteristics and their perceived level of FP involvement. Emotional distress [profile of mood states (POMS)] and QoL [European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Core 30 (EORTC QLQ-C30)] were reassessed every 3-6 months, whether patients had metastasis or not, up to 18 months. Results were regrouped according to cancer phase. Mixed models with repeated measurements were performed to identify variation in distress and QoL. RESULTS: In this cohort of 395 patients, distress was low at diagnosis (0.79 ± 0.7 on a 0-4 scale), raising to 1.36 ± 0.8 at the advance phase (p < 0.0001). Patient's global QoL scores significantly decreased from the diagnosis to the advance phase (from 66 to 45 on a 0-100 scale; p < 0.0001). At all phases of cancer, FP involvement was significantly associated with patients' distress (p = 0.0004) and their global perception of QoL (p = 0.0080). These associations remained statistically significant even after controlling for age, gender, and presence of metastases. CONCLUSIONS: This study provides new knowledge on patients' emotional distress and QoL with cancer evolution and, particularly, their association with FP involvement. Other studies should be conducted to further explore FP role in cancer supportive care.
 INTRODUCTION:: Bevacizumab is approved in combination with chemotherapy as first-line treatment for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Preclinical data suggest that enzastaurin and bevacizumab may have complementary effects in inhibiting angiogenesis. METHODS:: Eligibility criteria: ≥18 years of age, chemonaïve, stage IIIB/IV nonsquamous NSCLC, and Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status 0 to 1. Patients were randomized to placebo or enzastaurin 500 mg orally daily (after a loading dose), plus pemetrexed 500 mg/m, carboplatin area under the curve 6, and bevacizumab 15 mg/kg, intravenously, every 21 days for four cycles. Patients without progression received maintenance therapy with bevacizumab and placebo or enzastaurin. The primary objective was progression-free survival (PFS). Planned sample size was 90 patients, one-sided alpha of 0.20, with two interim analyses: one for safety and the second for futility, with a PFS hazard ratio of 0.8857. RESULTS:: Forty patients were randomized. No unique safety concerns were noted at the first interim analysis. The early stopping rule for futility was met at the second interim analysis. Median PFS was 3.5 months and 4.3 months (hazard ratio: 1.04, 95% confidence interval: 0.49-2.21), and response rates were 20% and 30% (p = 0.462) for enzastaurin and placebo, respectively. Grade 3 or 4 toxicity was similar between the two arms. Two patients died on study because of respiratory arrest and pulmonary embolism. An additional patient died of sepsis secondary to a gastrointestinal perforation >30 days after study treatment discontinuation. CONCLUSIONS:: Enzastaurin does not improve efficacy when combined with pemetrexed, carboplatin, and bevacizumab. This combination does not warrant further study in NSCLC.
 OBJECTIVE:: We analyzed non-small cell lung cancer patient survival in our single institution database to evaluate the effect of visceral pleural invasion (VPI) on survival and to propose a method of incorporating VPI into T-status classification in future staging systems. METHODS:: We reviewed 2725 consecutive surgically resected non-small cell lung cancer patients with T1a, T1b, T2a, T2b, or T3 tumors for their clinicopathologic characteristics and prognoses. Visceral pleural invasion was classified using the criteria of the 7th edition of the TNM Classification for Lung and Pleural Tumors. RESULTS:: There were no significant differences in survival between PL1 and PL2 patients. Therefore, we decided to combine the PL1 and PL2 patient groups into a single VPI+ group, and compare survival with a PL0 (VPI-) group to analyze the effect of VPI on T classification. The best survival was observed in patients with a T1a/VPI- tumor, followed by those with a T1b/VPI- tumor. In comparison, survival was similarly worse among patients with a T1a/VPI+, T1b/VPI+, T2a/VPI-, or T2b/VPI- tumor. The worst survival was observed in patients with a T2a/VPI+, T2b/VPI+ or T3 tumor. CONCLUSIONS:: Otherwise T2 tumors with VPI, regardless of size, may be classified as T3 tumors in the next edition of the TNM Classification for Lung and Pleural Tumors.
 INTRODUCTION:: Sorafenib is a multikinase inhibitor affecting pathways involved in tumor progression and angiogenesis. We conducted a phase II trial of sorafenib in platinum-treated patients with extensive stage small cell lung cancer to determine the tumor response rate, toxicity, and overall survival. METHODS:: Patients with histologically confirmed, measurable disease, Zubrod performance status 0 to 1, and no more than 1 prior platinum-based treatment were eligible. Patients were stratified by platinum-sensitivity status: sensitive (progression >90 days after platinum) or refractory (progression during or ≤90 days after platinum). Patients were treated with sorafenib 400 mg orally twice a day continuously on a 28-day cycle. RESULTS:: Of 89 patients registered, 82 were evaluable for toxicity assessment, and 83 were evaluable for response. There were four partial responses seen among the 38 patients in the platinum-sensitive stratum, for an estimated response rate of 11% (95% confidence interval: 3-25%), and one partial response among the 45 patients in the platinum-refractory stratum, for an estimated response rate of 2% (95% confidence interval: 0-12%). The median overall survival estimates were 6.7 months (95% confidence interval: 6.1-9.1 months) for the platinum-sensitive stratum and 5.3 months (95% confidence interval: 3.3-7.5 months) in the platinum-refractory stratum. Nineteen patients discontinued treatment because of adverse events or side effects from therapy. CONCLUSIONS:: Based on the lack of disease control seen in our trial, further investigation of single-agent sorafenib in the small cell lung cancer population is not recommended. Combination trials of sorafenib and chemotherapy are ongoing.
 INTRODUCTION:: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling pathway plays a crucial role in the development and progression of lung cancer. We searched for mutations of EGFR pathway genes in non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) and analyzed their relationship with clinicopathologic features. METHODS:: Mutations of EGFR, ERBB2, ERBB3, ERBB4, KRAS, NRAS, BRAF, PTEN, PIK3CA, LKB1, and AKT1 genes were determined by direct sequencing in 173 surgically resected NSCLCs-56 squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) and 117 adenocarcinomas (ACs). RESULTS:: Of the 173 NSCLCs, a total of 65 mutations were detected in 63 (36.4%) tumors-10 (17.9%) in SCCs and 53 (45.3%) in ACs. Mutations in EGFR pathway genes were significantly more frequent in women and ACs than in women and SCCs (p = 0.02 and p < 0.001, respectively). The mutations occurred in a mutually exclusive pattern. When the genes were divided into three subgroups according to their roles in the signaling cascade, mutations in the EGFR/ERBB2 and KRAS/BRAF genes were more frequent in ACs than in SCCs (p < 0.001 and p = 0.01, respectively). In marked contrast, mutations in the PIK3CA/PTEN were more frequent in SCCs than in ACs (p = 0.002). Furthermore, mutations in the PIK3CA/PTEN genes were more frequent in smokers (p = 0.04). DISCUSSION:: Our study demonstrates that mutations in each part of the EGFR pathway were associated with different clinicopathologic features in patients with NSCLCs.
 INTRODUCTION:: Survivin is an apoptotic inhibitor, involves in regulation of apoptosis and cell cycle progression, and its polymorphisms may influence the development and progression of cancer. This study evaluated the impact of the survivin gene polymorphisms on survival of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. METHODS:: In this case-cohort follow-up study, a total of 568 NSCLC patients were investigated and 12 single nucleotide polymorphisms in survivin gene were genotyped by using the Illumina GoldenGate platform. RESULTS:: During the maximum of 72 months of follow-up, 314 (55.11%) deaths were observed. After adjusting for age, gender, smoking status, histology, stage, surgical operation, and chemotherapy or radiotherapy status, Cox hazard proportional model suggested that four single nucleotide polymorphisms had statistically significant impacts on NSCLC survival (rs3764383, AG/GG versus AA, hazard ratio [HR] = 0.78, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.62-0.99; rs8073069, GG versus CG/CC, HR = 1.76, 95% CI: 1.16-2.67; rs4789551, GG versus AG/AA, HR = 2.04, 95% CI: 1.08-3.86; rs1042489, GG versus AG/AA, HR = 1.37, 95% CI: 1.03-1.83). Further combined analysis showed that the high risk group (3-4 unfavorable loci) presented a 1.84-fold (95% CI: 1.22-2.77) increased risk compared with low risk group (0-2 unfavorable loci). Among 185 stage III to IV patients who received only chemotherapy, only the potentially functional rs8073069 still had a significantly increased risk on the prognosis of NSCLC (GG versus CG/CC, HR = 2.06, 95% CI: 1.10-3.87). CONCLUSIONS:: Our results suggest that polymorphisms in survivin may be a genetic modifier for NSCLC prognosis in this Chinese population.
 BACKGROUND:: Bevacizumab improves responses and progression-free survival when added to first-line paclitaxel/carboplatin or cisplatin/gemcitabine for patients with advanced nonsquamous non-small cell lung cancer. This study was designed to evaluate toxicities and efficacy of gemcitabine/carboplatin/bevacizumab. METHODS:: Patients with untreated advanced nonsquamous non-small cell lung cancer, with no evidence of brain metastases and not on anticoagulation were eligible. Patients received gemcitabine 1000 mg/m on days 1 and 8; carboplatin area under the curve 5 day 1; and bevacizumab 15 mg/kg day 1 every 3 weeks for up to six cycles. Bevacizumab was then continued every 3 weeks until disease progression or unacceptable toxicity. RESULTS:: From July 2006 to December 2008, 48 patients were enrolled: 23 (48%) men, 25 (52%) women, and 19 (40%) never smokers. One patient never received therapy and is not included in the analysis. Median cycle number was 8 (1-42) with 37 patients (78.7%) completing ≥4 cycles of three drugs. Dose reductions occurred in 34 (72.3%) patients. Grade 3/4 toxicities included neutropenia (47%/15%), thrombocytopenia (11%/15%), anemia (6%/0%), dyspnea (6%/2%), bacterial pneumonia (4%/0%), and hypertension (4%/2%). No neutropenic fevers occurred. One patient died of hemoptysis. Grade 3 bleeding occurred in three other patients. There were seven (14.9%) partial responses. Median time to first event (progression/death/toxicity requiring discontinuation) was 6.4 months (95% confidence interval: 4.8-7.9 months). The median overall survival (OS) was 12.8 months (95% confidence interval: 10.0-16.5). The OS is 57% at 1 year and 10% at 2 years. CONCLUSIONS:: Although perhaps skewed by a high proportion of nonsmokers and women, treatment with gemcitabine/carboplatin/bevacizumab has an acceptable toxicity profile with promising median OS despite a low response rate.
 BACKGROUND:: Some studies (but not others) suggested that high doses are beneficial in small cell lung cancer (SCLC). We hypothesized that dose-response curve (DRC) shape reflects resistance mechanisms. METHODS:: We reviewed published SCLC clinical trials and converted response rates into estimated mean tumor cell kill, assuming killing is proportional to reduction in tumor volume. Mean % cell survival was plotted versus planned dose intensity. Nonlinear and linear meta-regression analyses (weighted according to the number of patients in each study) were used to assess DRC characteristics. RESULTS:: Although associations between dose and cell survival were not statistically significant, DRCs sloped downward for five of seven agents across all doses and for all seven when lowest doses were excluded. Maximum mean cell kill across all drugs and doses was approximately 90%, suggesting that there may be a maximum achievable tumor cell kill irrespective of number of agents or drug doses. CONCLUSIONS:: Downward DRC slopes suggest that maintaining relatively high doses may possibly maximize palliation, although the associations between dose and slope did not achieve statistical significance, and slopes for most drugs tended to be shallow. DRC flattening at higher doses would preclude cure and would suggest that "saturable passive resistance" (deficiency of factors required for cell killing) limits maximum achievable cell kill. An example of factors that could flatten the DRC at higher doses and lead to saturable passive resistance would be presence of quiescent, noncycling cells.
 Malignancies account for more than a third of all deaths in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-positive patients. Although acquired immunodeficiency syndrome-related mortality is decreasing with the introduction of effective antiretroviral therapy, the incidence of lung cancer in patients with HIV remains high. Lung cancer has now become the leading cause of mortality among the nonacquired immunodeficiency syndrome defining malignancies. Within the HIV population, the incidence of lung cancer is estimated to be approximately 2 to 4 times that of the general population. Often these patients present with advanced disease (stage III or IV) at a younger age and have an inferior overall survival, when compared with non-HIV patients. Development of lung cancer in patients with HIV has been linked to various factors including immunosuppression, CD4 count, viral load, and smoking. This article reviews the impact of HIV on the incidence, risk factors, clinical presentation, and treatment of lung cancer.
 INTRODUCTION:: Racial disparities have been reported in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) staging and therapeutic outcomes. We investigated whether such disparities exist in the era of modern noninvasive staging modalities, including positron emission tomography scan use. METHODS:: NSCLC patients from the California Cancer Registry diagnosed between January 1, 1994, and December 31, 2004, were included. The likelihood of obtaining invasive (thoracoscopy, bronchoscopy, and mediastinoscopy) and noninvasive staging procedures (computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, and positron emission tomography scans), along with surgical resection, were analyzed using logistic regression adjusted for known confounders. RESULTS:: Of 13,762 NSCLC patients, 12,395 with adequate staging information were included. 10,217 patients (82%) were classified as white, 2178 patients (18%) were non-white, and 738 were black patients (6%). No association was seen between race and the use of either noninvasive (odds ratio [OR] = 1.02; p = 0.76) or invasive staging procedures (OR = 0.96; p = 0.44). However, compared with white patients, black patients had a lower likelihood of undergoing surgery, regardless of noninvasive (OR = 0.6; p <0.001) or invasive staging use (OR = 0.63; p = 0.02). There was no survival difference for those who underwent surgery between white and non-white patients, regardless of noninvasive (hazard ratio = 0.95; p = 0.45) or invasive staging (hazard ratio = 1.03; p = 0.79). CONCLUSIONS:: In contrast to prior published work, we found no difference in rates of both invasive and noninvasive staging between white and non-white patients. However, non-white patients-particularly blacks-were less likely to receive surgery. The reason for the apparent difference in surgical rates could not be explained by the variables we evaluated. Thus, other factors such as personal preference or access to care require further investigation.
 BACKGROUND:: Targeted agents such as tyrosine kinase inhibitors have been extensively studied in preclinical systems and in advanced-stage patients. Little is known about levels of kinase inhibitors found in tumors as opposed to plasma. Similarly, effects of inhibitors on tumor signaling pathways in patient-based materials are unclear. To explore these questions, we conducted a trial of a brief course of preoperative gefitinib, an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitor, in early-stage non-small cell lung cancer. METHODS:: Patient with early-stage non-small cell lung cancer received 4 weeks of gefitinib 250 mg daily before surgical resection. Pre- and posttreatment computerized tomography scans and positron emission tomography scans were used to assess clinical response. Gefitinib and surgical toxicity were evaluated. Tumor tissue was evaluated for gefitinib levels and was compared with plasma gefitinib levels. Activated signaling molecules including EGFR, STAT3, ERK, and AKT were examined in surgically resected tumor tissue. RESULTS:: Twenty-three patients participated in the study, and all had surgical resection of tumors. No toxicities unrelated to known effects of gefitinib or surgery were encountered. Twenty-two patients had stable disease, and one had progression in tumor size. There was no correlation with positron emission tomography response and computerized tomography response. Tumor levels of gefitinib were approximately 40-fold higher than plasma levels, indicating potential tumor concentration of gefitinib. Tyrosine phosphorylated STAT3 was abundant in the surgically resected tumor tissue, indicating potential role in primary resistance in vivo. CONCLUSIONS:: This study confirms previous preclinical observations that tumor tissues concentrate gefitinib. Persistent STAT3 may be leading to primary resistance to EGFR inhibitors in vivo.
 OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the mortality for an occupational cohort and discuss its suitability as an internal comparison population. METHODS: The study included 114,683 employees who worked at 1 of 25 US locations between January 1, 1960, and December 31, 2005. Standardized mortality ratios (SMRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated based on US rates. RESULTS: The SMRs were significantly favorable for all causes, malignant neoplasms, heart disease, and external causes. The most common cancer sites were lung in men (SMR = 83, 95% CI = 80 to 86), and breast in women (SMR = 94, 95% CI = 80 to 111). CONCLUSIONS: Overall, the mortality rates were favorable and robust. Discussed within are topics of historical concern at specific locations that may influence the cohort's appropriateness for future studies.
 OBJECTIVE: This cohort study examined the effects of occupational exposure to toner, a particulate material with widespread use in today's society, on mortality. METHODS: The study included 33,671 employees of a xerographic company employed between 1960 and 1982 as manufacturing workers or customer service engineers. Vital status was tracked through 1999. Standardized mortality ratios (SMRs) were calculated using the US population for comparison. RESULTS: All-cause SMRs for toner-exposed populations were 0.65 and 0.84 for White men and women, respectively, and 0.37 and 0.74 for non-White men and women, respectively. SMRs for all cancers, lung cancer, respiratory disease, and cardiovascular disease in toner-exposed men were lower than 1.0. CONCLUSIONS: Results are consistent with general mortality patterns among healthy working populations. There was no evidence that toner exposure increases the risk of all-cause mortality or cause-specific mortality for the 23 categories of death analyzed.
 OBJECTIVE: Myocardial infarction has been associated with both transportation noise and air pollution. We examined residential exposure to aircraft noise and mortality from myocardial infarction, taking air pollution into account. METHODS: We analyzed the Swiss National Cohort, which includes geocoded information on residence. Exposure to aircraft noise and air pollution was determined based on geospatial noise and air-pollution (PM10) models and distance to major roads. We used Cox proportional hazard models, with age as the timescale. We compared the risk of death across categories of A-weighted sound pressure levels (dB(A)) and by duration of living in exposed corridors, adjusting for PM10 levels, distance to major roads, sex, education, and socioeconomic position of the municipality. RESULTS: We analyzed 4.6 million persons older than 30 years who were followed from near the end of 2000 through December 2005, including 15,532 deaths from myocardial infarction (ICD-10 codes I 21, I 22). Mortality increased with increasing level and duration of aircraft noise. The adjusted hazard ratio comparing ≥60 dB(A) with <45 dB(A) was 1.3 (95% confidence interval = 0.96-1.7) overall, and 1.5 (1.0-2.2) in persons who had lived at the same place for at least 15 years. None of the other endpoints (mortality from all causes, all circulatory disease, cerebrovascular disease, stroke, and lung cancer) was associated with aircraft noise. CONCLUSION: Aircraft noise was associated with mortality from myocardial infarction, with a dose-response relationship for level and duration of exposure. The association does not appear to be explained by exposure to particulate matter air pollution, education, or socioeconomic status of the municipality.
 Genomic studies have identified a D398N variation in the α5 subunit of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (AChRs) which increases risk of nicotine dependence and lung cancer. (α4β2)(2)α5 AChRs are a significant brain presynaptic subtype in brain. Their high sensitivity to activation by nicotine and high Ca(++) permeability give them substantial functional impact. α3β4(*) and α3β2(*) AChRs are predominant postsynaptic AChRs in the autonomic nervous system, but rare in brain. The amino acid 398 of α5 is located in the large cytoplasmic domain near the amphipathic α helix preceding the M4 transmembrane domain. These helices have been shown to influence AChR conductance by forming portals to the central channel. We report that α5 N398 lowers Ca(++) permeability and increases acute desensitization in (α4β2)(2)α5, but not in (α3β4)(2)α5 or (α3β2)(2)α5 AChRs. This suggests that a positive allosteric modulator (PAM) would augment nicotine replacement therapy for those with this risk variant. α5 D398N variation does not alter sensitivity to activation. The high sensitivity to activation and desensitization of (α4β2)(2)α5 AChRs by nicotine results in a narrow concentration range in which activation and desensitization curves overlap. This region centers on 0.2 μM nicotine, a concentration typically sustained in smokers. This concentration would desensitize 60% of these AChRs and permit smoldering activation of the remainder. The low sensitivity to activation and desensitization of (α3β4)(2)α5 AChRs by nicotine results in a broad region of overlap centered near 10 μM. Thus, at the nicotine concentrations in smokers, negligible activation or desensitization of this subtype would occur.
 BACKGROUND: Paclitaxel (Taxol) and vinorelbine have shown synergism of cytotoxic effects in vitro and clinical activity in phase I and II studies. This combination was compared prospectively with the paclitaxel/gemcitabine regimen in non-operable non-small-cell lung cancer. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Chemotherapy-naive patients, stage IIIbwet and IV with performance status (0-1), were randomized to receive paclitaxel 200 mg/m(2) on day 1 plus gemcitabine 1 gm/m(2) (group A) on days 1 and 8 every 3 weeks or paclitaxel 80 mg/m(2) plus vinorelbine 22.5 mg/m(2) (group B) on days 1, 8 and 15 every 4 weeks. RESULTS: A total of 398 out of 415 patients were eligible for analysis on intent-to-treat basis (group A: 196, group B: 202). Progression-free survival (PFS) was 5.0 months [95% confidence interval (CI) 4.3-5.6] and 4.4 months (95% CI 3.7-5.2) for groups A and B respectively (P = 0.365). Median survival was 11.1 months (95% CI 9.2-13.0) and 8.6 months (95% CI 7.0-10.2) for groups A and B respectively (P = 0.147). Grade 3/4 neutropenia and leukopenia were worse in group B (P < 0.001, in both cases). Febrile neutropenia and severe infections were more prominent (P < 0.001, P = 0.029 respectively) in group B. CONCLUSION: Although response rate, PFS and survival were non-different in both groups, toxicity was significantly worse in group B and therefore further investigation of P-Vin is of no value.
 Background Sarcoidosis is a systemic disease of unknown aetiology characterised by granuloma formation and the presence of interferon γ (IFNγ)-producing T cells that cause inflammation and tissue damage in multiple organs, especially the lung. Exosomes are nano-sized immunomodulatory vesicles of endosomal origin released from a diverse range of cells and are also found in physiological fluids including bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) from healthy individuals. Objective To investigate whether exosomes are enriched in the lungs of patients with sarcoidosis compared with healthy individuals and whether they could contribute to pathogenesis. Design BALF exosomes from patients with sarcoidosis (n=36) and healthy controls (n=14) were compared by electron microscopy, flow cytometry, western blot analysis and mass spectrometry. BALF exosomes were incubated with autologous peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) or the human bronchial epithelial cell line 16HBE14o-. Cytokines were measured by ELISPOT and ELISA. Results BALF from patients with sarcoidosis showed increased levels of exosomes compared with healthy individuals. Exosomes from patients showed significantly higher expression of MHC class I and II, tetraspanins CD9, CD63 and CD81 as well as neuregulin-1, known to be associated with cancer progression. Furthermore, BALF exosomes from patients induced significantly higher IFNγ and interleukin (IL)-13 production in autologous PBMCs compared with healthy individuals and could also stimulate IL-8 production from epithelial cells. Conclusion The results indicate for the first time a role for exosomes in human lung disease with possible contributions to the initiation and progression of inflammation in sarcoidosis. This suggests that exosomes may be a new potential target for the clinical treatment of lung diseases.
 Maintenance of adequate nutrition is an integral component of the cancer treatment process. Numerous factors should be considered when evaluating the nutritional status of patients with cancer. A systematic review of the literature revealed the importance of nutrition interventions in patients with cancer who were undergoing chemotherapy. Counseling in nutrition has been shown to improve quality of life, strengthen response to therapy, and increase survival. Lung cancer presents a significant risk as the leading cause of cancer morbidity and mortality in the United States. In addition, nutritional deficiencies are experienced by most adults with lung cancer during the course of their disease and treatment. The deficiencies compound the cost of treatment and also increase morbidity and mortality in this patient population. Further study of nutritional interventions is needed to promote better outcomes and quality of life in patients with lung cancer.
 Anemia is common among patients with malignant tumors, due to the disease and chemotherapy. Anemia decreases patient's quality of life, and worsens the dose-intensity of chemotherapy. The aim of this retrospective data-analysis was to evaluate quality of life and hemoglobin levels in 19 consecutive lung cancer patients receiving beta-erythropoietin, due to chemotherapy induced anemia. A self developed, patient source data based quality of life questionnaire was used. The mean pre-erythropoietin hemoglobin concentration of the patients was 96.31±6.72 g/L (mean±SD), the post-treatment hemoglobin concentration 111.63±14.05 g/L (p<0.05). During the chemotherapy of the 19 patients with lung cancer, transfusion was given only four times. The mean quality of life total score of the patients increased significantly during erythropoietin treatment that was resulted by the improvements of scores determining dizziness, tachycardia, and fatigue. Main limitations of this real life data analysis are low patient number and the lack of validation in the used questionnaire. In summary, according to our experiences, the use of beta-erythropoietin in patients with lung cancer results improved quality of life and a low rate of transfusions. Orv. Hetil., 2010, 41, 1684-1688.
 Staging systems aim to describe malignant tumours in a standardized fashion to assist in therapy planning and estimation of prognosis, allow comparison of different therapeutic strategies, facilitate communication between individuals and institutions, improve our knowledge of malignant disease and ultimately improve the outcome for patients. With the continuous increase in data and, ideally, our understanding of a disease and its potential therapy, every staging system requires continuous adjustment. The TNM staging system by the International Union against Cancer (UICC) is applied worldwide and revised regularly, with intervals aiming at a compromise between up-to-date information on the one hand and providing continuity by avoiding too short-lived revisions on the other hand. The 6th edition was published in 2002 and the 7th edition was published in 2009. The 7th edition became current from January 2010 on.
 This presentation discusses the optimum magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) sequence for lung cancer assessment in a clinical setting, and the sensitivity and specificity of MRI (alone and in combination with diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI)-MR) compared with those of computed tomography (CT) and fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (PET) for lung cancer staging. The role of perfusion studies (by CT or MRI), of DWI-MRI, blood oxygenation level dependent sequences and PET in defining the aggressiveness of lung tumours and in evaluating the response to radiochemotherapy is also discussed.
 OBJECTIVE: Caregivers maintain critical roles in cancer patient care. Understanding cancer-related information effects both caregiver involvement and ability to have needs met. This study examines the mediating role caregiver's clinic visit involvement has on the relationships between caregiver's information competence and their need fulfillment and clinic visit satisfaction. METHODS: Secondary analysis of 112 advanced lung, breast, and prostate cancer caregivers participating in a large clinical trial. Caregiver information competence was assessed at pretest. Involvement, need fulfillment, and visit satisfaction were assessed immediately following the clinic appointment. RESULTS: Involvement correlated with information competence (r=.21, p<.05), need fulfillment (r=.48, p<.001), and satisfaction (r=.35, p<.001). The correlation between information competence and need fulfillment (r=.26, p<.01) decreased when controlling for involvement (r=.19, p=.049), demonstrating mediation, and accounted for 24.4% of the variance in need fulfillment. The correlation between information competence and satisfaction (r=.21, p=.04), decreased and was non-significant when controlling for involvement (r=.15, p=.11), demonstrating mediation, and accounted for 13% of variance in visit satisfaction. CONCLUSION: Caregiver's clinic visit involvement mediates the relationships between their information competence and their need fulfillment and visit satisfaction. PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS: Efforts to improve the caregiving experience, and potentially patient outcomes, should focus on system-wide approaches to facilitating caregivers' involvement and assertiveness in clinical encounters.
 Background:  Paraneoplastic neurological syndromes (PNS) almost invariably predate detection of the malignancy. Screening for tumours is important in PNS as the tumour directly affects prognosis and treatment and should be performed as soon as possible. Objectives:  An overview of the screening of tumours related to classical PNS is given. Small cell lung cancer, thymoma, breast cancer, ovarian carcinoma and teratoma and testicular tumours are described in relation to paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis, subacute sensory neuronopathy, subacute autonomic neuropathy, paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration, paraneoplastic opsoclonus-myoclonus, Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS), myasthenia gravis and paraneoplastic peripheral nerve hyperexcitability. Methods:  Many studies with class IV evidence were available; one study reached level III evidence. No evidence-based recommendations grade A-C were possible, but good practice points were agreed by consensus. Recommendations:  The nature of antibody, and to a lesser extent the clinical syndrome, determines the risk and type of an underlying malignancy. For screening of the thoracic region, a CT-thorax is recommended, which if negative is followed by fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET). Breast cancer is screened for by mammography, followed by MRI. For the pelvic region, ultrasound (US) is the investigation of first choice followed by CT. Dermatomyositis patients should have CT-thorax/abdomen, US of the pelvic region and mammography in women, US of testes in men under 50 years and colonoscopy in men and women over 50. If primary screening is negative, repeat screening after 3-6 months and screen every 6 months up till 4 years. In LEMS, screening for 2 years is sufficient. In syndromes where only a subgroup of patients have a malignancy, tumour markers have additional value to predict a probable malignancy.
 Abstract Purpose: High symptom burden and hospital mortality among patients with lung cancer argues for early palliative care intervention. Patient characteristics and discharge dispositions in hospitalized patients with lung cancer receiving usual care were compared to those referred to a new palliative care service. Methods: A retrospective database review of all lung cancer discharges receiving usual care (UC) and palliative care service (PCS) consultation was conducted. Demographics, length of stay, discharge disposition, and mortality were described and compared. Palliative Performance Scale scores were described according to discharge disposition in the PCS group. Disposition of all patients receiving either chemotherapy or surgery was also noted. Results: A total of 1476 hospital discharges with a diagnosis of lung cancer occurred between March 15, 2006 and June 30, 2009. Among all discharges, 9% received chemotherapy and 29% had surgery. The PCS was consulted for 8% of all lung cancer patients most commonly to address end-of-life-issues. PCS patients were more likely to be at the end-of-life than UC patients as evidenced by higher hospital mortality (31% versus 7%), higher intensive care (ICU) mortality (67% versus 16%) and more frequent discharge to hospice (41% versus 7%). PCS patients were hospitalized a median of 6 days before a referral was made. Hospitalization was significantly longer for PCS patients (M&#x2009;=&#x2009;16.3 days, p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001) than UC patients (M&#x2009;=&#x2009;8.3 days). Conclusions: In the first 3 years of a new palliative care initiative consults for lung cancer patients occurred late in the hospital stay or when death was imminent.
 PURPOSE: Predicting complex patterns of respiration can benefit the management of the respiratory motion for radiation therapy of lung cancer. The purpose of the present work was to develop a patient-specific, physiologically relevant respiratory motion model which is capable of predicting lung tumor motion over a complete normal breathing cycle. METHODS: Currently employed techniques for generating the lung geometry from four-dimensional computed tomography data tend to lose details of mesh topology due to excessive surface smoothening. Some of the existing models apply displacement boundary conditions instead of the intrapleural pressure as the actual motive force for respiration, while others ignore the nonlinearity of lung tissues or the mechanics of pleural sliding. An intermediate nonuniform rational basis spline surface representation is used to avoid multiple geometric smoothing procedures used in the computational mesh preparation. Measured chest pressure-volume relationships are used to simulate pressure loading on the surface of the model for a given lung volume, as in actual breathing. A hyperelastic model, developed from experimental observations, has been used to model the lung tissue material. Pleural sliding on the inside of the ribcage has also been considered. RESULTS: The finite-element model has been validated using landmarks from four patient CT data sets over 34 breathing phases. The average differences of end-inspiration in position between the landmarks and those predicted by the model are observed to be 0.450 +/- 0.330 cm for Patient P1, 0.387 +/- 0.169 cm for Patient P2, 0.319 +/- 0.186 cm for Patient P3, and 0.204 +/- 0.102 cm for Patient P4 in the magnitude of error vector, respectively. The average errors of prediction at landmarks over multiple breathing phases in superior-inferior direction are less than 3 mm. CONCLUSIONS: The prediction capability of pressure-volume curve driven nonlinear finite-element model is consistent over the entire breathing cycle. The biomechanical parameters in the model are physiologically measurable, so that the results can be extended to other patients and additional neighboring organs affected by respiratory motion.
 PURPOSE: To investigate the effects of breathing variation on gating window internal target volume (ITVGW) in respiratory gated radiation therapy. METHOD AND MATERIALS: Two-dimensional dynamic MRI (dMRI) of lung motion was acquired in ten volunteers and eight lung cancer patients. Resorted dMRI using 4DCT acquisition method (RedCAM) was generated for selected subjects by simulating the image rebinning process. A dynamic software generated phantom (dSGP) was created by moving a solid circle (to mimic the "tumor") with dMRI-determined motion trajectories. The gating window internal target area (ITAGw, 2D counterpart of ITVGW) was determined from both RedCAM and dSGP/dMRI. Its area (A), major axis (L1), minor axis (L2), and similarity (S) were calculated and compared. RESULTS: In the phantom study of 3 cm tumor, measurements of the ITAGW from dSGP (A =10.0 +/- 1.3 cm2, L1=3.8 +/- 0.4 cm, and L2=3.3 +/- 0.1 cm) are significantly (p <0.001) greater than those from RedCAM (A=8.5 +/- 0.7 cm(2), L1 =3.5 +/- 0.2 cm, and L2=3.1 +/- 0.1 cm). Similarly, the differences are significantly greater (p <0.001) for the 1 cm tumor (A=1.9 +/- 0.5 cm(2), L1 =1.9 +/- 0.4 cm, and L2=1.3 +/- 0.1 cm in dSGP; A=l1.3 +/- 0.1 cm(2), L1=1.5 +/- 0.2 cm, and L2 = 1.1 +/- 0.1 cm in RedCAM). In patient studies, measurements of the ITAGW from dMRI (A =15.5 +/- 8.2 cm(2), Ll=5.0 +/- 1.1 cm, and L2=3.8 +/- 1.2 cm) are also significantly greater (p <0.05) than those from RedCAM (A=13.2 +/- 8.5 cm(2), L1=4.3 +/- 1.4 cm, and L2=3.7 +/- 1.2 cm). Similarities were 0.9 +/- 0.1, 0.8 +/- 0.1, and 0.8 +/- 0.1 in the 3 cm tumor phantom, 1 cm tumor phantom, and patient studies, respectively. CONCLUSION: ITVGW can be underestimated by 4DCT due to breathing variations. An additional margin may be needed to account for this potential error in generating a PTVGW. Cautions need to be taken when generating ITVGW from 4DCT in respiratory gated radiation therapy, especially for small tumors (<3 cm) with a large motion range (>1 cm).
 We have developed an algorithm for real-time volumetric image reconstruction and 3D tumor localization based on a single x-ray projection image. We first parameterize the deformation vector fields (DVF) of lung motion by principal component analysis (PCA). Then we optimize the DVF applied to a reference image by adapting the PCA coefficients such that the simulated projection of the reconstructed image matches the measured projection. The algorithm was tested on a digital phantom as well as patient data. The average relative image reconstruction error and 3D tumor localization error for the phantom is 7.5% and 0.9 mm, respectively. The tumor localization error for patient is approximately 2 mm. The computation time of reconstructing one volumetric image from each projection is around 0.2 and 0.3 seconds for phantom and patient, respectively, on an NVIDIA C1060 GPU. Clinical application can potentially lead to accurate 3D tumor tracking from a single imager.
 The 1995 Lung Cancer Study Group consensus recommending lobectomy for stage I non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has directed lung cancer resections since its publication. However, enhancements in imaging technology over the last decade have produced larger cohorts of patients presenting with localized, early-stage disease. Today, multislice computer tomography is widely available, capable of detecting NSCLC at smaller sizes, with improved spatial resolution, and is used in screening programs for high-risk individuals. Furthermore, the maturation of minimally invasive surgical resection (video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery) has reduced perioperative morbidity and mortality, improved postoperative lung function, and demonstrated equivalent oncologic effectiveness to open surgery. The mandatory use of lobectomy for patients with small stage IA NSCLC is now being challenged. Numerous single-institution trials have demonstrated that well-selected use of sublobar resection can afford comparable survival and recurrence rates to lobectomy, particularly in high-risk patients. Currently, a prospective, randomized multi-institutional phase III trial is being conducted by the Cancer and Lymphoma Group B (CALGB 140503) to determine whether patients with small (< or =2 cm) peripheral NSCLC tumors can safely undergo sublobar resection while maintaining rates of survival and recurrence that are comparable to lobectomy. This review summarizes the literature from the past 15 years to assist in applying those conclusions to future research innovation.
 The development of reliable gene expression profiling technology is having an increasing impact on our understanding of lung cancer biology. The present study aimed to determine any correlation between the phenotypic heterogeneity and genetic diversity of lung cancer.Microarray analysis was performed on a set of 46 tumour samples and 45 paired non-tumour samples of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) samples in order to establish gene signatures in primary adenocarcinomas and squamous-cell carcinomas, determine differentially expressed gene sequences at different stages of the disease and identify sequences with biological significance for tumour progression. After the microarray analysis, the expression level of 92 selected genes was validated by qPCR and the robust Bonferroni test in an independent set of 70 samples composed of 48 tumour samples and 22 non-tumour samples.Gene sequences were differentially expressed as a function of tumour type, stage and differentiation grade. High upregulation was observed for KRT15 and PKP1, which may be good markers to distinguish squamous-cell carcinoma samples. High downregulation was observed for DSG3 in stage IA adenocarcinomas. © 2010 UICC.
 Adoptive cell therapy involving the use of ex vivo generated cytokine-induced killer cells (CIKs) provides a promising approach to immunotherapy. However, the therapeutic activity of CIKs is limited by the immunosuppressive factors active in the host. It has become increasingly apparent that manipulation of the recipient immune system with the preconditioning regimen is essential to guarantee the antitumor effect of subsequent adoptive cell therapy. In this study, paclitaxel (PTX) and cisplatin (DDP) were used as preconditioning drugs combined with CIKs to illustrate the potential mechanisms underlying the synergic antitumor effect against Lewis lung cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. We found that 3LL cells displayed an increased sensitization to CIKs-induced lysis after treatment with PTX or DDP in vitro. Significant inhibition of tumor growth was observed in mice treated with combinatorial chemo-immunotherapy with respect to untreated or single regimen treated ones. Prior chemotherapy markedly enhanced the intratumoral accumulation of CD3(+) T lymphocytes and the homing of CIKs to the spleen and tumor. Moreover, the frequencies of intratumoral and splenic regulatory T cells (Tregs) were significantly decreased after chemotherapy pretreatment. Our findings provide a new rationale for combining immunotherapy and chemotherapy to induce a synergistic antitumor response in patients with lung cancer. © 2010 UICC.
 Objective: One in three cancer patients will experience significant psychosocial distress, yet less than 10% will seek formal counseling. Who are the patients accessing counseling and what are their presenting needs? The purpose of this study was to identify referral patterns and psychosocial distress in cancer patients newly referred to a psycho-oncology counseling service.Methods: Consecutive new referrals were tracked over 1 year (n=361). On initial visit, 145 patients completed a demographic survey, Brief Symptom Inventory-18 (BSI-18), Cancer Coping Questionnaire and Medical Outcomes Study Social Support Survey.Results: Approximately one in five newly referred patients never attended counseling, with a significant representation of men (p=0.016) and lung cancer patients (p=0.010). Of 361 referrals, 295 patients attended initial counseling, 259 were approached, and 145/259 (56%) completed the survey. Most were women (79%), urban-dwelling (73%), diagnosed with non-advanced cancer (72%), well-educated (68%) and married (56%); average age of 52 years (SD=12.3). Two most common diagnoses were breast (36%) and genitourinary (14%) cancers. A total of 59% were significantly distressed (BSI-18 global severity index T-score≥63) with less available social support than non-distressed patients (p=0.022). Coping strategy use did not differ significantly between distressed and non-distressed groups. Two of five patients were not significantly distressed.Conclusions: Most cancer patients attending counseling are well-educated urban residing women, with significant psychosocial distress. Further research is needed to better understand barriers and appropriate screening methods for accessing counseling, as well as the needs of men, advanced cancer patients, rural residents, and less well-educated people. Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
 Objective: Although typically high, the need for information varies between cancer patients. Few studies, however, have examined the factors that predict patient information needs. This study investigated the influence of different styles of adjustment to cancer on information needs. It was proposed that adjustment styles can be defined in terms of goal pursuit and that adjustment influences information needs as these also arise from goal pursuit.Method: Seventy-three lung cancer patients were recruited at their first appointment with their radiation oncologist. Participants completed the Patient Information Needs Questionnaire measuring Disease Orientated (DO) information and Action Orientated (AO) information, the Mini-Mental Adjustment to Cancer Scale, and a purpose-built measure of cancer-related personal goals.Results: High levels of the adjustment styles, Fighting Spirit and Anxious Preoccupation, were related to a high need for DO information (p=0.042 and 0.023, respectively). Conversely, high levels of the adjustment style Cognitive Avoidance was related to a low need for DO information (p=0.041). High levels of Anxious Preoccupation were also positively related to a high need for AO information (p=0.018). Support for the proposed theoretical model was also found: information goals predicted information needs and mediated the relationship between Fighting Spirit and DO information need.Conclusions: These findings suggest that information needs vary as a function of adjustment to cancer. Consequently information provision to cancer patients could be more appropriately tailored by attending to how a patient is adjusting to their diagnosis of cancer. Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
 Objective: Cancer and treatments for cancer affect specific aspects of sexual functioning and intimacy; however, limited qualitative work has been done in diverse cancer populations. As part of an effort to improve measurement of self-reported sexual functioning, we explored the scope and importance of sexual functioning and intimacy to patients across cancer sites and along the continuum of care.Methods: We conducted 16 diagnosis- and sex-specific focus groups with patients recruited from the Duke University tumor registry and oncology/hematology clinics (N=109). A trained note taker produced field notes summarizing the discussions. An independent auditor verified field notes against written transcripts. The content of the discussions was analyzed for major themes by two independent coders.Results: Across all cancers, the most commonly discussed cancer- or treatment-related effects on sexual functioning and intimacy were fatigue, treatment-related hair loss, weight gain and organ loss or scarring. Additional barriers were unique to particular diagnoses, such as shortness of breath in lung cancer, gastrointestinal problems in colorectal cancers and incontinence in prostate cancer. Sexual functioning and intimacy were considered important to quality of life. While most effects of cancer were considered negative, many participants identified improvements to intimacy after cancer.Conclusion: Overall evaluations of satisfaction with sex life did not always correspond to specific aspects of functioning (e.g. erectile dysfunction), presenting a challenge to researchers aiming to measure sexual functioning as an outcome. Health-care providers should not assume that level of sexual impairment determines sexual satisfaction and should explore cancer patients' sexual concerns directly. Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
 Objective: There is little information about the accuracy of patient perceptions of their life expectancy. Here, we compare patient perceptions of their outlook and their oncologist's estimates of life expectancy to actual survival.Methods: The Unmet Needs Study recruited patients with metastatic cancer. Oncologists were asked to estimate patient survival as: (1) weeks; (2) months; (3) <1 year; (4)<2 years; and (5) >2 years. Patients were asked to estimate their outlook on a numerical scale from 1-7. Patient and oncologist estimates were compared with actual survival.Results: Complete survival data were available for 50 patients: median age 63.5 years; 48% male; tumor types: 32% colorectal, 24% lung, 10% upper gastrointestinal cancer, 12% unknown primary; and median survival 6.8 months. The oncologists were 32% accurate in predicting survival and overestimated survival 42% of the time (weighted kappa=0.34). The correlation between self-reported patient outlook and survival was modest (Spearman's rho=0.36, p=0.01). The median survival for categories of outlook of 1-3, 4-5, and 6-7 were 4.4, 5.4, and 14.8 months, respectively (p=0.01). Overseas-born patient was the only independent predictor for the oncologists' accurate estimates (p=0.01).Conclusions: Oncologists were relatively poor at predicting survival and tended to be optimistic in their prognostication. The probability of survival significantly decreased with worse self-reported patient outlook. Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
 Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) consist of carbon atoms arranged in sheets of graphene rolled up into cylindrical shapes. This class of nanomaterials has attracted attention because of their extraordinary properties, such as high electrical and thermal conductivity. In addition, development in CNT functionalization chemistry has led to an enhanced dispersibility in aqueous physiological media which indeed broadens the spectrum for their potential biological applications including gene delivery. The aim of this study is to determine the capability of different cationic polymer-grafted multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWNTs) (polymer-g-MWNTs) to efficiently complex and transfer plasmid DNA (pCMV-βGal) in vitro without promoting cytotoxicity. Carboxylated MWNT is chemically conjugated to the cationic polymers polyethylenimine (PEI), polyallylamine (PAA), or a mixture of the two polymers. In order to explore the potential of these polymer-g-MWNTs as gene delivery systems, we first study their capacity to complex plasmid DNA (pDNA) using agarose gel electrophoresis. Gel migration studies confirm pDNA binding to polymer-g-MWNT with different affinities, highest for PEI-g-MWNT and PEI/PAA-g-CNT constructs. β-galactosidase expression is assessed in human lung epithelial (A549) cells, and the cytotoxicity is determined by modified LDH assay after 24 h incubation period. Additionally, PEI-g-MWNT and/or PEI/PAA-g-MWNT reveal an improvement in gene expression when compared to the naked pDNA or to the equivalent amounts of PEI polymer alone. Mechanistically, pDNA was delivered by the polymer-g-MWNT constructs via a different pathway compared to those used by polyplexes. In conclusion, polymer-g-MWNTs may be considered in the future as a versatile tool for efficient gene transfer in cancer cells in vitro, provided their toxicological profile is established.
 Objective: To explore the relationship between the expression of excision repair cross-complementation group 1 (ERCC1) and class III ß-tubulin and the clinical characteristics and overall survival of patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Methods: Immunohistochemical analysis was used to determine the protein expression of ERCC1 and class III ß-tubulin in 160 completely resected NSCLC primary tumor samples, 50 of which were paired with adjacent normal tissue samples and another 40 benign lung lesion tissue samples as controls. Clinical data at baseline, disease-free survival and overall survival were also collected. Univariate and multivariate Cox models were used to analyze the risk factors. Results: In 160 tumor samples, the ERCC1 and class III ß-tubulin positive rates obtained with immunohistochemistry were 46.9% and 49.4%, respectively. Both biomarkers had a higher positive rate in male patients. For patients who did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy, ERCC1 positivity was associated with longer survival (median survival time 73 vs 53 months, p=0.041), while in patients treated with platinum chemotherapy, ERCC1 positivity tended to be associated with poor survival (median survival time 41 vs 54 months, p=0.014). Class III ß-tubulin positivity was also associated with poor survival (median survival time 38 vs 58 months, p<0.001), but had no influence on the survival of patients who did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy. Conclusions: ERCC1 and class III ß-tubulin could be important survival predictors for completely resected NSCLC patients treated with adjuvant chemotherapy. Further prospective studies need to be performed to test this hypothesis in Chinese patients.
 As 20% of stage I NSCLC patients develop recurrent and often incurable cancer, the identification of prognostic markers has a meaningful clinical application. The biological significance of steroid hormone and EGF receptors, able to regulate key physiological functions, remains elusive in NSCLC. Our aim was to investigate the prognostic input of estrogen receptors (ERα, ERβ), progesterone receptors (PR) and EGFR in tumors from 58 stage I NSCLC patients. Antigen expression was analyzed by immunohistochemistry. Prognostic evaluation was performed with the multivariate Cox model. We found that about 70 and 40% of samples expressed ERα or ERβ at cytoplasmic or nuclear level, respectively. Besides, only 12.1% of samples weakly expressed nuclear PR and 62.7% showed membrane EGFR staining. Correlation studies indicated an inverse association between EGFR expression and smoking status (p<0.01). Multivariate studies showed that the lack of nuclear ERβ or the loss of EGFR expression were independent prognosis markers associated with shorter overall survival. We also found that patients whose tumors were negative for these two biomarkers presented the worst outcome. In conclusion, our findings could be useful for selecting stage I NSCLC patients with poor prognosis to apply an earlier treatment that impacts on survival.
 Chemoradiotherapy is a useful treatment strategy in patients with locally advanced cancers. In particular, combination of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) with X-ray irradiation is effective for the treatment of some types of gastrointestinal cancers. We investigated the antitumor effects of combination treatment with X-ray and S-1, a unique formulation of 5-FU, on human cancer xenografts in nude mice and compared the efficacy of this treatment to that of radiotherapy combined with cisplatin, UFT, another oral 5-FU prodrug, and intravenous 5-FU. Tumors implanted into the left hind legs of mice were treated with a dose of 2 or 5 Gy X-ray irradiation on days 1 and 8, and S-1, UFT and 5-FU were administered for 14 days. The efficacy of combined treatment with 8.3 mg/kg S-1 and 2 Gy X-ray irradiation in treating non-small cell lung cancer xenografts (Lu-99 and LC-11) was significantly higher than that of treatment with S-1 alone or 2 Gy X-ray irradiation alone, and the antitumor activity of combined treatment was similar to that of 5 Gy X-ray irradiation alone. Although 8.3 mg/kg S-1 and 17.5 mg/kg UFT had equivalent antitumor activity; the antitumor efficacy of combination treatment with S-1 and 2 Gy X-ray irradiation on LC-11 tumors was significantly higher than that of combination treatment with UFT and 2 Gy X-ray irradiation. Combination treatment with S-1 and X-ray irradiation was also more effective against pancreatic tumors than combination treatment with intravenous 5-FU and X-ray irradiation. To elucidate the reason for the increased antitumor efficacy of combination treatment with S-1 and X-ray irradiation, the antitumor effect of gimeracil, one of the components of S-1, was tested in combination with 2 Gy X-ray irradiation. These experiments demonstrated that gimeracil enhanced the efficacy of X-ray irradiation against lung as well as head and neck cancer xenografts in a dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, we observed decreased expression of γ-H2AX protein, a marker of DNA repair, in LC-11 tumors treated with X-ray irradiation and gimeracil compared to that observed in tumors treated with X-ray irradiation alone, suggesting that gimeracil may inhibit rapid repair of X-ray-induced DNA damage in tumors. The present study suggests that chemoradiotherapy using S-1 acts through a novel mechanism and may prove useful in treating patients with locally advanced cancers whose disease progression is difficult to control using chemotherapy alone.
 Docetaxel is a member of the taxane anti-microtubule class of chemotherapeutic agents, which are currently widely used in clinical cancer therapy. However, the anti-tumor mechanisms of docetaxel are not fully understood. Herein we show that docetaxel induces dose-dependent apoptosis in non-small cell lung cancer A549 cells, as detected by Annexin-V positive cells and PARP cleavage, which is via mitochondrial pathway and dependent on caspase-3 activation. Our study on the mechanisms confirms that docetaxel induces dose-dependent accumulation of cells in M phase and acetylation of α-tubulin, marker of tubulin stablization. Furthermore, docetaxel induces replication-dependent γ-H2AX formation which plays a crucial role in docetaxel-triggered apoptosis. The DNA polymerase inhibitor aphidicolin dose-dependently prevents docetaxel-induced γ-H2AX formation, as well as apoptosis. Notably, 0.6 µM APC almost completely blocked docetaxel-induced γ-H2AX formation and apoptosis. In addition, wortmannin pretreatment caused elevated γ-H2AX level, which was accompanied with increased apoptosis. This effect was due to the inhibition of DNA repair process by wortmannin, as down regulation of p21Waf1/Cip1 and DNA repair proteins such as Ku70, Ku80, DNA-PKcs and Rad50, were detected. These data show, for the first time, that the induction of apoptosis by docetaxel requires DNA replication, and replication-mediated DSBs are critical triggers of docetaxel-induced apoptosis.
 Lung cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer-related death worldwide. Curcumin has been reported to have an antitumor effect by inducing apoptosis and suppressing growth of tumor cells. However, the mechanism by which curcumin exerts its anti-cancer effect needs further research. The purpose of the present study was to identify a miRNA-mediated mechanism which plays a role in the anti-cancer effects of curcumin. Alterations in miRNA expression were seen in curcumin-treated A549 cells, including significant downregulation of miRNA-186* expression by microarray analysis and real-time PCR. The miRNA-186* functions by overexpression or inhibition were investigated using biological assays in A549 cells. Additionally, caspase-10 was identified as a target of miRNA-186* using dual luciferase reporter assays and western blot analysis. These results demonstrate that curcumin induces A549 cell apoptosis through a miRNA pathway. Also, miRNA-186* could serve as a potential gene therapy target in curcumin treatment. furthermore, caspase-10 was shown to be a target of miR-186* regulation.
 Disseminated cancer cells may initially require local nutrients and growth factors to thrive and survive in bone marrow. However, data on the influence of bone marrow derived cells (BMDC, also called bone stromal cells in some publications) on lung cancer cells is largely unexplored. This study explored the mechanism of how bone stromal factors contribute to the bone tropism in lung cancer. The difference among lung cancer cell lines in their abilities to metastasize to bone was found using the SCID animal model. Supernatant of bone marrow aspiration (BM) and condition medium from human bone stromal cells (BSC) were used to study the activity of bone stromal factors. We found bone stromal factors significantly increased the proliferation, invasion, adhesion and expression of angiogenosis-related factors, and inhibited the apoptosis for high bone metastasis H460 lung cancer cells. These biologic effects were not seen in SPC-A1 or A549 cells, which are low bone metastasis lung cancer cells. Adhesion of H460 cells to surface coated with bone stromal cells can activate some signal transduction pathways, and alter the expression of adhesion associated factors, including integrin β 3 and ADAMTS-1, two potential targets related with bone metastasis. We concluded that bone marrow derived cells had a profound effect on biological behavior of lung cancers, therefore favoring the growth of lung cancer cells in bone.
 Urotensin II (UII), originally identified from fish urophysis, is a potent vasoactive peptide and an endogenous ligand for an orphan G protein-coupled receptor GPR14, now named as urotensin II receptor (UT-R). In this study, we investigated the mRNA and protein expressions of UII and its receptor (UT-R) in human lung adenocarcinoma A549 cells, and the effect of exogenous UII on the proliferation of A549 cells in vitro and in vivo. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and western blot analysis showed that both mRNAs and proteins of UII and UT-R were obviously expressed in human lung adenocarcinoma A549 cells. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that UII peptide was mainly expressed in the cyto-plasm, and UT-R protein was expressed on the cytomembrane and also in the cytoplasm. 3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT) analysis demonstrated that treatment with different concentrations of human UII (10(-9), 10(-8), 10(-7) and 10(-6) M) for 48 h significantly increased the number of A549 cells. The effect of UII at the concentration of 10(-7) M on the proliferation of A549 cells is most pronounced. Nude mice bearing human lung adenocarcinoma A549 cells treated with UII showed a significant increase in tumor volume and tumor weight compared with control group. These findings suggest that UII may contribute to the pathogenesis of human lung adenocarcinoma as an autocrine/paracrine growth stimulating factor.
 Erlotinib is used as a standard treatment for recurrent advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations in NSCLC have been shown to be a predictive factor of erlotinib, although the relationship between K-ras oncogene (KRAS) mutations and erlotinib resistance is controversial. Recently, in vitro sequence-dependent interactions of erlotinib and docetaxel have been studied on as a novel therapeutic approach against NSCLC. The purpose of the present study was to determine the optimum novel regimen of erlotinib and docetaxel against NSCLC cells which have EGFR mutation (HCC827 cells), KRAS mutation (A549 cells) or both wild-type (NCI-H292 cells). First, we analyzed the effects of in vitro combination for cell proliferation-inhibition using a combination index. In all cell lines, docetaxel followed by erlotinib treatment showed nearly additive effects. On the other hand, erlotinib followed by docetaxel treatment showed remarkable antagonistic interactions. Second, we examined the effect of combinations on the in vitro apoptosis induction. Erlotinib followed by docetaxel treatment reduced apoptosis induction compared with docetaxel alone; in contrast, docetaxel followed by erlotinib treatment had no inhibitory effects on docetaxel-induced apoptosis in any of the cell lines. Finally, an in vivo tumor growth inhibition test was performed using xenograft models. Docetaxel followed by erlotinib administration resulted in significant tumor growth inhibition compared with erlotinib or docetaxel monotherapy in all models. In conclusion, we demonstrated that docetaxel followed by erlotinib therapy was a potentially optimum regimen against NSCLC regardless of the mutation status of EGFR and KRAS.
 Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of major health concerns worldwide and one of leading causes of cancer death after lung and gastric cancers. Simvastatin is a cholesterol-lowering drug which inhibits 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutarylcoenzyme CoA (HMG-CoA) reductase. Simvastatin exhibits numerous pleiotropic effects including anti-cancer activity. Yet, the anticancer effects in HCC remain poorly characterized. Therefore, in this study, we investigated the effects of simvastatin on tumor cell growth, apoptosis and cell cycle. HepG2 and Huh7 cell lines were treated with simvastatin (32 and 64 µM) for different time periods. Tumor cell growth was assessed using MTT assay. Apoptosis and cell cycle analysis were also evaluated. Analysis of cell cycle proteins involved in simvastatin-induced manipulation was performed by Western blot and quantitative RT-PCR analyses. Simvastatin induced a reduction of tumor cell growth. In both cell lines, simvastatin induced apoptosis and impaired cell cycle progression as depicted by the greater rates of G0/G1-phase cells than the rates of S-phase cells. Protein expression levels of cell cycle regulating proteins CDK1, CDK2, CDK4, cyclin D1, cyclin E, p19 and p27 were markedly altered by simvastatin. Moreover, CDC2, CCND1 and CDCN2D mRNA expressions were also altered by drug treatment. Collectively, these results suggest that simvastatin induces apoptosis in tumor cells and its anti-proliferative activity was accompanied by inhibition of cyclin-dependent kinases and cyclins, whereas CDK inhibitors p19 and p27 were enhanced. These results may provide novel insights into simvastatin tumor-suppressive action.

  BACKGROUND: Antibiotic therapy is thought to improve lung function in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) by decreasing neutrophil-derived inflammation. We investigated the origin and clinical significance of lactate in the chronically inflamed CF lung. METHODS: Lactate was measured in sputa of 18 exacerbated and 25 stable CF patients via spectrophotometry and gaschromatography. Lung function was assessed via spirometry. Seven patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and three patients with acute lung inflammation served as control groups. Neutrophil and bacterial lactate production was assessed under aerobic and anaerobic conditions. RESULTS: In sputum specimens of patients with respiratory exacerbations lactate concentrations decreased significantly (p<0.005) from 3.4±2.3mmol/L to 1.4±1.4mmol/L after 2-3weeks of intravenous antibiotics. Successful treatment was reflected in 16 patients (88.9%) by FVC increase associated with lactate decrease (p<0.05). In every single sputum lactate was detectable (3.0±3.1mmol/L, range 0.2-14.1mmol/L). Lactate was lower (1.6±0.8mmol/L) in sputa from seven COPD patients, and it was below the detection limit in three patients with acute lung inflammation. Neutrophil lactate production accumulated up to 10.5mmol/L after 4days, whereas bacterial lactate production did not appear to contribute substantially to sputum lactate concentrations. CONCLUSIONS: Successful antibiotic therapy is reflected by a decrease in lactate concentrations. Neutrophils are the most likely source for lactate in sputum of CF patients. Therefore lactate may be used to monitor responses to antibiotic therapy as an adjunct to lung function measurements.
  We report a case of hypersensitivity pneumonitis, possibly due to aerosolized colistin therapy for severe multi-resistant Gram-negative pneumonia. Microbiological eradication was achieved with colistin therapy, which was stopped after 12 days in view of rising eosinophilia and possible lung fibrosis. The eosinophil count started to normalize 3 days after stopping colistin therapy and the patient was eventually weaned to minimal ventilatory support.
  Pulmonary manifestations of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) typically include pleuritis, alveolar hemorrhage, and infectious pneumonia due to immunosuppression with less common entities including bronchiolitis, interstitial pneumonia, and pulmonary fibrosis. More rare manifestations include organizing pneumonia (OP) and diffuse alveolar damage (DAD). A similar but distinct entity of acute fibrinous and organizing pneumonia (AFOP), characterized by intra-alveolar fibrin deposition and associated organizing pneumonia, has been reported in association with connective tissue disorders, but has not been described in association with SLE. Reported herein is a patient with SLE and accompanying antiphospholipid syndrome with recent pulmonary embolism, persistent respiratory symptomology, and persistent radiographic abnormalities who underwent lung biopsy displaying features of AFOP. This case in conjunction with previous literature indicates that AFOP can be a manifestation of connective tissue disease including SLE and may be an underreported variant of medical lung disease due to overlap in histological characteristics with OP and DAD.
  Lu BR, Esquivel CO. A review of abdominal organ transplantation in cystic fibrosis. Pediatr Transplantation 2010. © 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Abstract:  With advances in medical treatments, patients with CF are having improved quality of life and living longer. Although pulmonary disease is still the leading cause of morbidity and mortality, this longevity has allowed for the development of other organ dysfunction, mainly liver and pancreas. This review discusses the abdominal organ complications and the role of abdominal organ transplantation in CF. Liver failure and portal hypertension complications are the most common indicators for liver transplantation in CF, and five-yr survival for isolated liver transplantation is >80%. Deficiency of pancreatic enzymes is almost universal and up to 40% of patients with CF can develop insulin-dependent diabetes, although the role of pancreas transplantation is less clear and needs further research. Finally, the need for lung transplantation should always be assessed and considered in combination with liver transplantation on a case-by-case basis.
  SUMMARY AT A GLANCE: For patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, a failure of heart rate to reduce by at least 14 beats/minute after the first minute of recovery following completion of a six-minute walk test is an independent predictor prognosis and of pulmonary hypertension. Background and Objective:  In patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), we sought to validate that abnormal heart rate recovery at one-minute (HRR1) after 6 minute walk test (MWT) predicts mortality and to explore the relationship between abnormal HRR1 and pulmonary hypertension (PH). Methods:  We identified IPF patients who performed a 6MWT as part of their clinical evaluation between 2006-2009 and were followed to lung transplantation or death. Right heart catheterization (RHC) data was collated and analyzed for the subgroup who had this procedure. Results:  There were 160 subjects who qualified for the survival analysis, and those with an abnormal HRR1 had worse survival than subjects with normal HRR1 (log-rank p = 0.01). Eight-two subjects had a right heart catheter (RHC); among them, abnormal HRR1 was associated with RHC-confirmed PH (X(2) = 4.83, p = 0.03) and had a sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, and negative predictive value of 52%, 74%, 41%, and 82% respectively for PH. In bivariate and multivariable analyses, abnormal HRR1 appeared to be the strongest predictor of RHC-confirmed PH (Odds Ratio [OR]= 4.0, 95%CI 1.17-13.69, p = 0.02 in the multivariable analysis). Conclusions:  This study adds to data that supports the validity of abnormal HRR1 as a predictor of mortality and of RHC-confirmed PH in IPF. Research is needed to further investigate the link between abnormal HRR1 and PH and to elucidate heart-lung interactions at work during exercise and recovery in patients with IPF.
  Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis is characterized by myofibroblast accumulation, extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and excessive collagen deposition. ECM-producing myofibroblasts may originate from epithelial cells through epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). TGF-β1 is an inducer of EMT in pulmonary epithelial cells in vitro and in vivo, though the mechanisms are unclear. We hypothesized that TGF-β1 induced EMT through Smad dependent and independent processes. To test this hypothesis, we studied the roles and mechanisms of TGF-β1 induced Smad and p38 Mitogen Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) signaling in EMT-related changes in pulmonary epithelial cells. Exposure of pulmonary epithelial 1HAEo- cells to TGF-β1 resulted in morphological and molecular changes of EMT over a 96-hour period; loss of cell-cell contact, cell elongation, down-regulation of E-cadherin, up-regulation of fibronectin, and up-regulation of collagen I. Both Smad2/3 and p38 MAPK signaling pathways were activated by TGF-β1. However, neither Smad2/3 nor p38 MAPK were required for the down-regulation of E-cadherin, yet p38 MAPK was associated with fibronectin up-regulation. Both Smad2/3 and p38 MAPK had a role in regulation of TGF-β1 induced collagen expression. Furthermore, these data demonstrate that Smads and p38 MAPK differentially regulate EMT-related changes in pulmonary epithelial cells. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
  Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β) plays a central role in the development of fibrosis by stimulating extracellular matrix accumulation, and signals either directly or indirectly through types I, II, and III (TβRI, II, and III) TGF-β receptor complexes. Ginsan, a polysaccharide extracted from Panax ginseng, has multiple immunomodulatory effects. Here, we examine whether ginsan regulates the fibrogenic process by interfering with TGF-β signaling pathways. TGF-β treatment of murine or human normal lung fibroblasts enhanced the levels of several fibrotic markers, including smooth muscle alpha actin (-SMA), collagen-1, and fibronectin. Interestingly, ginsan treatment either before or after TGF-β administration led to significant reductions in all of -SMA, collagen-1, and fibronectin expression levels. Ginsan not only inhibited phosphorylation of Smad2 and Smad3, but also attenuated pERK and pAKT signaling induced by TGF-β. Moreover, ginsan restored TβRIII protein expression, which was significantly downregulated by TGF-β, but reduced TβRI and TβRII protein levels. In a murine model of bleomycin (BLM)-induced pulmonary fibrosis, ginsan significantly suppressed accumulation of collagen, -SMA, and TGF-β. These data collectively suggest that ginsan acts as an effective anti-fibrotic agent in the treatment of pulmonary fibrosis by blocking multiple TGF-β signaling pathways. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
  The latent TGF-ß binding proteins (LTBP-1 -3, and -4) assist in the secretion and localization of latent TGF-ß molecules. Ltbp3(-/-) and Ltbp4S(-/-) mice have distinct phenotypes and only in the lungs does deficiency of either Ltbp-3 or Ltbp-4 cause developmental abnormalities. To determine if these two LTBPs have additional common functions, we generated mice deficient for both Ltbp-3 and Ltbp-4S. The only novel defect in Ltbp3(-/-);Ltbp4S(-/-) mice was an early lethality compared to mice with single mutations. In addition lung abnormalities were exacerbated and the terminal air sac septation defect was more severe in Ltbp3(-/-);Ltbp4S(-/-) mice than in Ltbp4S(-/-) mice. Decreased cellularity of Ltbp3(-/-);Ltbp4S(-/-) lungs was correlated with higher rate of apoptosis in newborn lungs of Ltbp3(-/-);Ltbp4S(-/-) animals compared to WT, Ltbp3(-/-), and Ltbp4S(-/-) mice. No differences in the maturation of the major lung cell types were discerned between the single and double mutant mice. However, the distribution of Type 2 cells and myofibroblasts was abnormal, and myofibroblast segregation in some areas might be an indication of early fibrosis. We also observed differences in ECM composition between Ltbp3(-/-);Ltbp4S(-/-) and Ltbp4S(-/-) lungs after birth, reflected in decreased incorporation of fibrillin-1 and -2 in Ltbp3(-/-);Ltbp4S(-/-) matrix. The function of the lungs of Ltbp3(-/-);Ltbp4S(-/-) mice after the first week of life was potentially further compromised by macrophage infiltration, as proteases secreted from macrophages might exacerbate developmental emphysema. Together these data indicate that LTBP-3 and -4 perform partially overlapping functions only in the lungs. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
  Chronic lung inflammation caused by bacterial pathogenesis through activation of nuclear factor kappa B (NFκB)-responsive proinflammatory genes is a major hurdle in the management of lung disease in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. The authors generated a disease-relevant cell-based high-content screen to identify novel anti-inflammatory compounds for treating lung inflammation in CF. The human bronchial epithelial cell line KKLEB, harboring the most common form of mutation that causes CF, was modified to express an NFκB-responsive green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter. After creation, the cell line was tested for its ability to respond to disease-relevant inflammatory stimuli elicited by treatment of cells with filtrates of Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolated from the airways of a CF patient. P. aeruginosa filtrates potently activated NFκB-responsive GFP reporter expression in cells. Subsequently, the assay was optimized for high-throughput screening (HTS) through generation of a Z factor (∼0.5) and by testing its tolerance to the commonly used solvents ethanol and DMSO. A pilot library of clinically approved compounds was screened for assay validation. Several compounds with known NFκB inhibitory activity were identified, including several steroidal compounds that have been clinically tested in CF. Thus, the assay can be used in a broader HTS campaign to find anti-inflammatory agents for use in CF.
  The long-term persistance of P. aeruginosa in the cystic fibrosis (CF) lung is characterized by the selection of a variety of genotypes and phenotypes that typically descend from one infecting P. aeruginosa clone, a process known as adaptive radiation. This adaptation process of P. aeruginosa includes complex physiological changes that likely confer a selective advantage to better thrive in the diverse niches and microenvironments of the inflamed and hostile CF airways. The occurrence of P. aeruginosa variants is fixed by mutation and selection. Common loss-of-function mutations in genes such as lasR, mucA and mexT lead to a general adaptation pattern and P. aeruginosa variants with increased antimicrobial resistance, alginate overproduction, reduced acute virulence, and improved metabolic fitness. Strikingly, several virulence-associated traits and immunostimulatory components of P. aeruginosa are turned off. In contrast, other cellular factors are positively selected such as the outer membrane protein OprF, the blue copper protein azurin, the cytochrome c peroxidase c551, and the enzymes of the arginine deiminase pathway ArcA-ArcD. These metabolic components probably are required for the optimal anaerobic or microaerobic growth and viability of P. aeruginosa within CF airways. Besides these common adaptations found by the comparison of P. aeruginosa isolates from different CF patients, the overall diversity of isogenic isolates from one CF patient is extended by variable changes in the expression of regulatory-, transport-, metabolic-, and virulence-associated genes. A better understanding of the microevolution of P. aeruginosa towards niche specialists according the selection pressure in the CF lung is a prerequisite to develop new strategies for the detection of P. aeruginosa variants, the antipseudomonal treatment, the prediction of the infectious disease state, and the development of efficient vaccines.
  Background.&#x2003; Antibiotic combination therapy might be more efficient than single antibiotics to combat Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms in the airways of patients with cystic fibrosis. We tested the ability of colistin sulphate&#x2013;tobramycin combinations and single antibiotics to kill P. aeruginosa biofilms. Methods.&#x2003; P. aeruginosa biofilms were generated in vitro and in rat lungs. In a pilot study, 5 patients with cystic fibrosis inhaled colistin and then tobramycin for 4 weeks. The changes in P. aeruginosa counts and lung function were assessed before and after therapy. Results.&#x2003; Antibiotic combination therapy significantly reduced the number of P. aeruginosa cells in P. aeruginosa biofilm models in vitro. When rats were challenged with [Formula: see text] cfu of P. aeruginosa, which was embedded in alginate beads, mortality rates, lung pathologic findings, and bacterial colony&#x2010;forming unit counts were significantly lower after 7 days in animals receiving antibiotic combination than in animals receiving single antibiotics. In patients with cystic fibrosis, inhaled colistin&#x2010;tobramycin was well tolerated and resulted in a mean decrease of [Formula: see text] log<inf>10</inf> cfu of P. aeruginosa per milliliter of sputum ([Formula: see text]). Measurements of forced expiratory volume in 1 s, obtained both before and after the study, did not differ significantly. Conclusion.&#x2003; Colistin&#x2010;tobramycin combinations are more efficient than respective single antibiotics for killing P. aeruginosa in biofilms in vitro, and they significantly reduced P. aeruginosa cell counts in a rat lung infection model and in patients with cystic fibrosis.
  We describe the design, synthesis, and optimization of first-in-class series of inhibitors of NADPH oxidase isoform 4 (Nox4), an enzyme implicated in several pathologies, in particular idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, a life-threatening and orphan disease. Initially, several moderately potent pyrazolopyridine dione derivatives were found during a high-throughput screening campaign. SAR investigation around the pyrazolopyridine dione core led to the discovery of several double-digit nanomolar inhibitors in cell free assays of reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, showing high potency on Nox4 and Nox1. The compounds have little affinity for Nox2 isoform and are selective for Nox4/1 isoforms. The specificity of these compounds was confirmed in an extensive in vitro pharmacological profile, as well as in a counterscreening assay for potential ROS scavenging. Concomitant benefits are good oral bioavailability and high plasma concentrations in vivo, allowing further clinical trials for the potential treatment of fibrotic diseases, cancers, and cardiovascular and metabolic diseases.
  Exposure to silica is associated with progressive pulmonary inflammation and fibrosis. Our previous study had demonstrated silica exposure could cause cell cycle alternation and activator protein-1 (AP-1) activation. This study showed that silica exposure induced phosphorylation of p70S6 kinase (p70S6K) and Akt in human embryo lung fibroblasts (HELFs). These changes were blocked by overexpression of dominant-negative mutants of phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (Δp85) or Akt (DN-Akt), respectively. Moreover, pretreatment of cells with rapamycin, a specific p70S6K inhibitor, could inhibit silica-induced cell cycle alteration, AP-1 activation, and phosphorylation of p70S6K, but had no effect on Akt phosphorylation. This suggested that phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI-3K)/AP-1 pathway was likely responsible for cell cycle changes. Furthermore, we observed the effect of the pathway on cell cycle regulatory proteins. Our results indicated that inactivation of PI-3K, Akt, or p70S6K could inhibit silica-induced overexpression of cyclin D1 and cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) and decreased expression of E2F-4. Taken together, silica could induce cell cycle changes through PI-3K/ AP-1 pathway in HELFs. Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
  HISTORY: Small bowel resection had to be performed because of an acute ileus in a 16-year old girl with mucoviscidosis. Severe respiratory insufficiency developed and she was transferred to the intensive care unit. INVESTIGATIONS: The clinical signs of a severe ARDS were demonstrated: Horowitz index < 200, pO (2) 57 mm Hg, FiO (2) 1,0, pCO (2) 82 mm Hg. Candida serology was positive (titer 1 : 5120), and there was a leukocytosis (20 000/µl), hypalbuminemia (14 g/l) and elevation of C-reactive protein (190 mg/l). TREATMENT AND COURSE: Because all non invasive treatment options had failed to improve the patient's condition, an extracorporal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) device was connected. Seven days later, after the pulmonary situation had improved, the device wassuccessfully removed; the patient was dicharged in a satisfactory condition after another month. CONCLUSION: ECMO is a another treatment option for serious ARDS in infection-related worsening of pulmonary cystic fibrosis.
  Aging is a natural process characterized by a progressive functional impairment and reduced capacity to respond adaptively to environmental stimuli. Aging is associated with increased susceptibility to a variety of chronic diseases, including type 2 diabetes mellitus, cancer, and neurological diseases. Lung pathologies are not the exception, and the prevalence of several interstitial lung diseases (ILDs), primarily idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, has been found to increase considerably with age. Although our understanding of the biology of aging has advanced remarkably in the last 2 decades, the molecular mechanisms linking aging to ILD remain unclear. Immunosenescence, oxidative stress, abnormal shortening of telomeres, apoptosis, and epigenetic changes affecting gene expression have been proposed to contribute to the aging process, and aging-associated diseases. Here, we review the emerging concepts highlighting the putative aging-associated abnormalities involved in some human ILDs.
  In patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) prevention of lung infections with Pseudomonas aeruginosa is of major importance. Principles to achieve this goal include vaccination, immediate use of antibiotics in patients newly colonized with the pathogen, and hygienic measures. The purpose of this review is to discuss recent developments in this context.
  Objective: To observe the expressions of matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) in rats with pulmonary fibrosis (PF) induced by bleomycin, and to explore the mechanisms of Shenlong Decoction in preventing and treating PF. Methods: A total of 230 Wistar rats were divided into normal control group, untreated group, prednisone group, and low-, medium- and high-dose Shenlong Decoction groups. Wistar rats were intratracheally injected with bleomycin to induce PF. From the 2nd day, rats in the normal control and untreated groups were lavaged with normal saline (NS), and rats in the other groups were lavaged with prepared Shenlong Decoction by the same amount. Hemotoxylin-eosin (HE) staining and Masson staining were used to observe pathological changes in lung tissue at different time points, and to evaluate whether the model was successfully induced. Expressions of MMP-2 and TIMP-1 mRNAs in rats' lung tissue were measured by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Results: Expressions of MMP-2 and TIMP-1 mRNAs in lung tissue of rats were observed from all groups at each time point. In comparison with the normal control group, on the 7th day, the transcription levels of MMP-2 and TIMP-1 mRNAs, especially the former, of the untreated group increased significantly (P<0.05 or P<0.01). On the 14th day, the transcription levels of MMP-2 and TIMP-1 mRNAs kept rising, especially the latter (P<0.05 or P<0.01). On the 28th day, the transcription level of MMP-2 decreased a little, while the transcription level of TIMP-1 mRNA did not stop increasing (P<0.05 or P<0.01). Compared with the untreated group, decrease of the transcription levels of MMP-2 and TIMP-1 mRNAs were observed in the treatment groups, especially the former, and this effect continued to the 28th day with the medium-dose Shenlong Decoction group decreasing most obviously (P<0.05 or P<0.01). Conclusion: Shenlong Decoction may inhibit the expression of MMP-2 mRNA by up-regulating the expression of TIMP-1 mRNA so as to slow the progression of PF.
  The development of drugs able to inhibit the expression of pro-inflammatory genes is of great interest in the treatment of cystic fibrosis (CF). Chronic pulmonary inflammation in the lungs of patients affected by CF is characterized by massive intra-bronchial infiltrates of neutrophils. This process is initiated upon interaction of pathogens (including Pseudomonas aeruginosa) with surface bronchial cells. Consequently, they release cytokines, the most represented being the potent neutrophilic chemokine Interleukin (IL)-8 and the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-6. The chronic inflammatory process is crucial, since it leads to progressive tissue damage and severe respiratory insufficiency. In order to reduce the adverse effects of the excessive inflammatory response, one of the approaches leading to inhibition of IL-8 and IL-6 gene expression is the transcription factor (TF) decoy approach, based on intracellular delivery of double stranded oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs) mimicking the binding sites of TFs and causing inhibition of binding of TFrelated proteins to regulatory sequences identified in the promoters of specific genes. Since the promoters of IL-8 and IL-6 contain consensus sequences for NF-κ B and Sp1, double stranded TF "decoy" ODNs targeting NF-κB and Sp1 can be used. Alternatively, screening of drugs targeting relevant TFs can be performed using drug cocktails constituted by extracts from medicinal plants inhibiting TF/DNA interactions. Finally, virtual screening might lead to identification of putative bioactive molecules to be validated using molecular and cellular approaches. By these means, low-molecular drugs targeting NF-κB and inhibiting IL-8 gene expression are available for pre-clinical testing using experimental systems recapitulating chronic pulmonary inflammation of patients affected by CF.
  In patients with atrial fibrillation, a betablocker is generally used initially to prevent recurrence or to slow the heart rate. Amiodarone is a last resort, mainly because of its numerous adverse effects. Dronedarone, chemically similar to amiodarone,was recently authorised for this indication in the European Union. In a double-blind trial versus amiodarone in 504 patients, the failure rate was significantly higher with dronedarone (75.1% versus 58.8%). Two placebo-controlled trials in heart failure patients yielded conflicting results. Dronedarone was associated with a statistically significant increase in mortality in a trial in 627 symptomatic patients free of arrhythmias. However, there was no statistically significant difference in a trial including 4630 patients with atrial fibrillation and a lower risk of cardiovascular events. There are no comparative trials versus other antiarrhythmic drugs or heart-rate-lowering agents, including betablockers and calcium channel blockers. Like other antiarrhythmic drugs, dronedarone also has arrhythmogenic effects, including bradycardia and QT prolongation. Other adverse effects include diarrhoea, nausea and vomiting, and cutaneous disorders. Transient elevation of creatinine levels is also frequent, and cases of renal failure have been reported. In the trial versus amiodarone, dronedarone had a different pattern of short-term adverse effects, including more gastrointestinal disorders but less frequent thyroid disorders, neurological disorders, hypersensitivity reactions, hypertension, and QT prolongation. Little is known of potential long-term adverse effects, especially pulmonary fibrosis. In practice, dronedarone is better tolerated but less effective than amiodarone in the short term.When antiarrhythmic drug therapy is needed, it is better to continue to use a betablocker or, as a last resort, amiodarone, a drug with better-documented adverse effects, especially during long-term treatment.
  Ammonium perchlorate (AP), an oxidizer, has been used in solid propellants. Although AP exposure has been suspected as a risk factor for the development of pulmonary fibrosis, data are still inconclusive. To evaluate the pulmonary toxicity and the potential pulmonary fibrosis caused by occupational exposure to this compound, 25 male rabbits were randomly allocated into five groups to receive AP or bleomycin or saline by intratracheal injection. All rabbits were sacrificed and total RNA from the lungs was extracted. Expressions of types I and III collagens, transforming growth factor-β(1) (TGF-β(1)) and tumour necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) messenger RNA (mRNA) were measured by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The expressions of type I and III collagen mRNA in low, moderate and high dose AP groups were significantly higher (p < 0.01 or p < 0.05) than that in the saline group. There was also a significant increased level of TGF-β(1) and TNF-α mRNA in the three AP groups compared with saline control group (p < 0.01 or p < 0.05). These results reveal that AP can increase gene expressions of types I, III collagens, TGF-β(1) and TNF-α in lung of rabbits exposed to AP. The overexpression of these biomarkers were considered as effective indicator linking to the development of pulmonary fibrosis and finally demonstrated that AP has potential to induce pulmonary fibrosis.
  Background and aim: Toll-like Receptors (TLRs), a key component of the innate immunity, are recently implicated in the pathogenesis of interstitial lung diseases (ILDs). As the involvement of TLRs has not yet been fully elucidated, the aim of the current study was to examine the expression of various TLRs in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) of patients with ILDs. Patients and Methods: We studied prospectively three groups of patients: (i) one group of 35 patients with fibrotic disorders; 16 with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and 19 with fibrotic interstitial pneumonias associated to collagen tissue disorders (CTD-IPs), (ii) one group of 14 patients with pulmonary sarcoidosis, and (iii) 11 normal subjects. We evaluated TLRs' expression with flow cytometry and mRNA expression with real-time PCR. RESULTS: An overexpression of TLR-3 mRNA was found in fibrotic disorders (CTD-IPs/IPF) in comparison with sarcoidosis (mean +/- SD, 1.104+/-1.087 versus 0.038+/-0.03, p=0.04). Additionally, TLR-3 mRNA was increased in CTD-IPs in comparison with IPF (p=0.001), sarcoidosis (p=0.002), and controls (p=0.05). An upregulation in TLR-7 and -9 mRNA expression was detected in IPF (p=0.05) and sarcoidosis (p=0.05) respectively, when compared to controls. A higher percentage of TLR-9 expressing cells was found in BALF of CTD-IPs when compared to IPF (mean +/- SD, 36.7+/-7.06 versus 14.85+/-3.82, p=0.025). CONCLUSION: We observed distinct profiles of TLRs' expression in fibrotic and granulomatous disorders. It is likely that they could play a key role in the pathogenesis of these diseases and represent future therapeutic targets.
  OBJECTIVE:: Connective tissue diseases (CTD) are associated with several interstitial lung diseases. The recently individualized syndrome of combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema (CPFE) has not previously been described in a CTD patient population. METHODS:: This multicenter study retrospectively investigated data from CTD patients with CPFE. Demographics and results of pulmonary function testing, high resolution computed tomography, lung biopsy, treatment, and outcomes were analyzed. RESULTS:: Data from 34 patients (23 males) with CTD (rheumatoid arthritis, n=18; systemic sclerosis [SSc], n=10; mixed or overlap CTD, n=4; other, n=2) spanning a mean duration ± standard deviation (SD) of 8.3 ± 7.0 years were analyzed. Mean age ± SD was 57 ± 11 years; 30 patients were current or ex-smokers. All patients exhibited emphysema of the upper lung zones and pulmonary fibrosis of the lower zones on HRCT. Dyspnea on exertion was present in all cases. Moderate impairment in pulmonary function test results and markedly reduced carbon monoxide transfer capacity were observed. Five patients with SSc exhibited pulmonary hypertension. Four patients died during follow-up. Patients with CTD and CPFE were significantly younger in comparison to a historical control group of patients with idiopathic CPFE, and more frequently female. They had higher lung volumes, lower diffusion capacity, higher pulmonary pressures, and were more frequently males than those with CTD and lung fibrosis without emphysema. CONCLUSIONS:: CPFE warrants inclusion as a novel, distinct pulmonary manifestation within the spectrum of CTD-associated lung disease in smokers or ex-smokers, especially in patients with rheumatoid arthritis or SSc.
  Objective. Systemic sclerosis-associated pulmonary arterial hypertension (SScPAH) has a disturbed function of the right ventricle (RV) when compared to idiopathic PAH (IPAH). Systemic sclerosis may also affect the heart. We hypothesize that RV differences may occur at the level of interstitial inflammation and-fibrosis and compared inflammatory cell infiltrate and fibrosis between the RV of SScPAH, IPAH, and healthy controls. Methods. Paraffin-embedded tissue samples of RV and left ventricle (LV) from SScPAH (n = 5) and IPAH (n = 9) patients and controls (n = 4) were picrosirius red stained for detection of interstitial fibrosis, which was quantified semiautomatically. Neutrophilic granulocytes (MPO), macrophages (CD68), and lymphocytes (CD45) were immunohistochemically stained and only interstitial leukocytes were counted. Presence of epi- or endocardial inflammation, and of perivascular or intimal fibrosis of coronary arteries was assessed semiquantitatively (0-3: absent to extensive). Results. RV's of SScPAH showed significantly more inflammatory cells than of IPAH (cells/mm(2), mean ± sd MPO 11 ± 3 versus 6 ± 1; CD68 11 ± 3 versus 6 ± 1; CD45 11 ± 1 versus 5 ± 1 , P < .05) and than of controls. RV interstitial fibrosis was similar in SScPAH and IPAH (4 ± 1 versus 5 ± 1%, P = .9), and did not differ from controls (5 ± 1%, P = .8). In 4 SScPAH and 5 IPAH RV's foci of replacement fibrosis were found. No differences were found on epi- or endocardial inflammation or on perivascular or intimal fibrosis of coronary arteries. Conclusion. SScPAH RVs display denser inflammatory infiltrates than IPAH, while they do not differ with respect to interstitial fibrosis. Whether increased inflammatory status is a contributor to altered RV function in SScPAH warrants further research.
  Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and its metabolite adenosine regulate airway mucociliary clearance via activation of purinoceptors. In this study, we investigated the contribution of goblet cells to airway epithelial ATP release. Primary human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cultures, typically dominated by ciliated cells, were induced to develop goblet cell metaplasia by infection with respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) or treatment with interleukin-13 (IL-13). Under resting conditions, goblet cell metaplastic cultures displayed enhanced mucin secretion, which was accompanied by increased rates of ATP release and mucosal surface adenosine accumulation as compared to non-metaplastic control HBE cultures. Intracellular calcium chelation [1,2-bis(o-aminophenoxy)ethane-N,N,N',N'-tetraacetic acid tetraacetoxymethyl ester (BAPTA-AM)] or disruption of the secretory pathways (nocodazole, brefeldin A, and N-ethylmaleimide) decreased both mucin secretion and ATP release in goblet cell metaplastic HBE cultures. Conversely, stimuli that triggered calcium-regulated mucin secretion, e.g., ionomycin or UTP, increased luminal ATP release and adenyl purine accumulation in control and goblet cell metaplastic HBE cultures. Goblet cell-associated ATP release was not blocked by the connexin/pannexin hemichannel inhibitor, carbenoxolone, suggesting direct nucleotide release from goblet cell vesicles rather than the hemichannel insertion. Collectively, our data demonstrate that nucleotide release is increased by goblet cell metaplasia, reflecting, at least in part, a mechanism tightly associated with goblet cell mucin secretion. Increased goblet cell nucleotide release and resultant adenosine accumulation provide compensatory mechanisms to i) hydrate mucins by paracrine stimulation of ciliated cell ion/water secretion and maintain mucociliary clearance and ii) modulate inflammatory responses.
  Introduction: Injury to alveolar epithelial cells is central to the pathophysiology of Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis (IPF). An abnormal autoimmune response directed against antigens of the alveolar epithelium may contribute to the disease. METHODS: To detect circulating autoantibodies (Ab) directed against epithelial structures, we performed immunoblot by separating human placental amnion extract or alveolar epithelial cells (A549 cell line) proteins on polyacrylamide gels, blotting on nitrocellulose membranes and incubating with serum from patients with IPF (n=40), or healthy subjects (n=40). Proteomic analysis and mass spectrometry characterized the target protein. Inhibition experiments performed with the correspondent recombinant protein confirmed our results. RESULTS: We identified IgG autoAbs recognizing a 200 kDa protein in the serum of IPF patients. Proteomic analysis identified this protein as human periplakin (PPL) a component of desmosomes. Anti-PPL Abs were found by immunoblot in both serum and BAL in IPF patients : 16/40 (40%) of them were positive versus none of the control subjects. Immunohistochemistry revealed that PPL was strongly expressed in bronchial and alveolar epithelium, but that PPL exhibited changes in intracellular localization among normal and fibrotic alveolar epithelium. In an alveolar epithelial wound repair assay, an antiPPL IgG decreased cell migration. Recombinant PPL induced BAL T lymphocytes proliferation. IPF patients with anti-PPL Abs had a more severe respiratory disease, despite no difference in survival. CONCLUSION: We found a new circulating autoAb directed against PPL in IPF patients, associated with a more severe disease.
  RATIONALE: The markedly improved life expectancy of children with cystic fibrosis (CF) has created a new challenge, as traditional markers of lung disease are frequently normal in young children. This prevents identification of individuals who may benefit from more aggressive therapy, and also obliges large study numbers and prolonged duration for intervention studies. There is an urgent need for alternative surrogates which detect early lung disease, and which track through early childhood. OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to determine whether multiple-breath washout results at preschool age can predict subsequent abnormal lung function. METHODS: Preschool children (3-5 yrs) with CF and healthy controls underwent spirometry and multiple-breath washout with testing repeated during early school-age (6-10 yrs). Primary outcomes were FEV1 from spirometry and Lung Clearance Index (LCI) from multiple-breath washout. MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Forty-eight children with CF and 45 healthy children completed testing. Thirty-five (73%) children with CF had abnormal LCI at preschool age, whilst only 5 had abnormal FEV1. The positive predictive value of preschool LCI for predicting any abnormal school-age result was 94%, with a negative predictive value of 62%. Only one child with abnormal FEV1 at school-age had had a normal preschool LCI. In contrast, for preschool FEV1 the positive predictive value was 100%, but negative predictive value only 25%. CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that an abnormal preschool LCI predicts subsequent lung function abnormalities, whereas a normal preschool LCI usually remains normal. MBW has potential as a clinical and research outcome in young children with CF.
  Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a progressive, life-threatening, interstitial lung disease of unknown etiology. The median survival of patients with IPF is only two to three years, yet, some patients live much longer. Respiratory failure resulting from disease progression is the most frequent cause of death. To date we have limited information as to predictors of mortality in patients with IPF and research in this area has failed to yield prediction models that can be reliably used in clinical practice to predict individual risk of mortality. The goal of this concise clinical review is to examine and summarize the current data on the clinical course, individual predictors of survival, and proposed clinical prediction models in IPF. Finally, we will discuss challenges and future directions related to predicting survival in IPF.
  Pseudomonas aeruginosa is the major pathogen of chronic lung infections in individuals with cystic fibrosis (CF). Traditionally, it has been regarded as living in planktonic form, and as being able to perform only simple physiological activities. Recent studies in biofilm infections in CF patients, however, show that P. aeruginosa can perform many social behaviors, like cooperation and cheating. Based on the theory of "survival of the fittest", it may be presumed that every individual will take advantage of cheating instead of cooperation to increase its fitness, at the cost of group survival. In reality, however, a bacterial society can remain stable, even though cheaters arise frequently in the population. It is therefore possible that there are anti-cheating mechanisms in a bacterial society. The cheaters of P. aeruginosa will cause the loss or the decrease of the pathogenesis of the microorganism in the cystic fibrosis host. These defects in pathogenesis will be disadvantageous to bacterial colonization and compromise the resistance to host immunity. We therefore propose the hypothesis that the pathogenesis in cystic fibrosis lung infections could be one of the anti-cheating mechanisms that contribute to the hidden costs of the cheater strains. To test this hypothesis, we designed an experiment in an animal model of CF. If this hypothesis can be confirmed, it will illustrate that nontrivial analogies exist between microbial social behaviors and the social traits that are observed in the more traditional model systems for sociobiology. This will not only provide a genetic model for sociobiology research, but also cast light on the social control of chronic bacterial infections.
  RATIONALE AND OBJECTIVES: The use of hyperpolarized (3)He magnetic resonance imaging as a quantitative lung imaging tool has progressed rapidly in the past decade, mostly in the assessment of the airway diseases chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma. This technique has shown potential to assess both structural and functional information in healthy and diseased lungs. In this study, the regional measurements of structure and function were applied to a bleomycin rat model of interstitial lung disease. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Male Sprague-Dawley rats (weight, 300-350 g) were administered intratracheal bleomycin. After 3 weeks, apparent diffusion coefficient and fractional ventilation were measured by (3)He magnetic resonance imaging and pulmonary function testing using a rodent-specific plethysmography chamber. Sensitized and healthy animals were then compared using threshold analysis to assess the potential sensitivity of these techniques to pulmonary abnormalities. RESULTS: No significant changes were observed in total lung volume and compliance between the two groups. Airway resistance elevated and forced expiratory volume significantly declined in the 3-week bleomycin rats, and fractional ventilation was significantly decreased compared to control animals (P < .0004). The apparent diffusion coefficient of (3)He showed a smaller change but still a significant decrease in 3-week bleomycin animals (P < .05). CONCLUSIONS: Preliminary results suggest that quantitative (3)He magnetic resonance imaging can be a sensitive and noninvasive tool to assess changes in an animal interstitial lung disease model. This technique may be useful for longitudinal animal studies and also in the investigation of human interstitial lung diseases.
  BACKGROUND: Hyperactivity of the epithelial sodium (Na+) channel (ENaC) and increased Na+ absorption by airway epithelial cells leading to airway surface liquid dehydration and impaired mucociliary clearance are thought to play an important role in the pathogenesis of cystic fibrosis (CF) pulmonary disease. In airway epithelial cells, ENaC is constitutively activated by endogenous trypsin-like serine proteases such as Channel-Activating Proteases (CAPs). It was recently reported that ENaC activity could also be stimulated by apical treatment with human neutrophil elastase (hNE) in a human airway epithelial cell line, suggesting that hNE inhibition could represent a novel therapeutic approach for CF lung disease. However, whether hNE can also activate Na+ reabsorption in primary human nasal epithelial cells (HNEC) from control or CF patients is currently unknown. METHODS: We evaluated by short-circuit current (Isc) measurements the effects of hNE and EPI-hNE4, a specific hNE inhibitor, on ENaC activity in primary cultures of HNEC obtained from control (9) and CF (4) patients. RESULTS: Neither hNE nor EPI-hNE4 treatments did modify Isc in control and CF HNEC. Incubation with aprotinin, a Kunitz-type serine protease inhibitor that blocks the activity of endogenous CAPs, decreased Isc by 27.6% and 54% in control and CF HNEC, respectively. In control and CF HNEC pretreated with aprotinin, hNE did significantly stimulate Isc, an effect which was blocked by EPI-hNE4. DISCUSSION: These results indicate that hNE does activate ENaC and transepithelial Na+ transport in both normal and CF HNEC, on condition that the activity of endogenous CAPs is first inhibited. CONCLUSIONS: The potent inhibitory effect of EPI-hNE4 on hNE-mediated ENaC activation observed in our experiments highlights that the use of EPI-hNE4 could be of interest to reduce ENaC hyperactivity in CF airways.
  BACKGROUND: Lung infection by various organisms is a characteristic feature of cystic fibrosis (CF). CFTR genotype effects acquisition of Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Pa), however the effect on acquisition of other infectious organisms that frequently precede Pa is relatively unknown. Understanding the role of CFTR in the acquisition of organisms first detected in patients may help guide symptomatic and molecular-based treatment for CF. METHODS: Lung infection, defined as a single positive respiratory tract culture, was assessed for 13 organisms in 1,381 individuals with CF. Subjects were divided by predicted CFTR function: 'Residual': carrying at least one partial function CFTR mutation (class IV or V) and 'Minimal' those who do not carry a partial function mutation. Kaplan-Meier estimates were created to assess CFTR effect on age of acquisition for each organism. Cox proportional hazard models were performed to control for possible cofactors. A separate Cox regression was used to determine whether defining infection with Pa, mucoid Pa or Aspergillus (Asp) using alternative criteria affected the results. The influence of severity of lung disease at the time of acquisition was evaluated using stratified Cox regression methods by lung disease categories. RESULTS: Subjects with 'Minimal' CFTR function had a higher hazard than patients with 'Residual' function for acquisition of 9 of 13 organisms studied (HR ranging from 1.7 to 3.78 based on the organism studied). Subjects with minimal CFTR function acquired infection at a younger age than those with residual function for 12 of 13 organisms (p-values ranging: <0.001 to 0.017). Minimal CFTR function also associated with younger age of infection when 3 alternative definitions of infection with Pa, mucoid Pa or Asp were employed. Risk of infection is correlated with CFTR function for 8 of 9 organisms in patients with good lung function (>90%ile) but only 1 of 9 organisms in those with poorer lung function (<50%ile). CONCLUSIONS: Residual CFTR function correlates with later onset of respiratory tract infection by a wide spectrum of organisms frequently cultured from CF patients. The protective effect conferred by residual CFTR function is diminished in CF patients with more advanced lung disease.
  A 43-year-old woman had a pulmonary tumor detected by a computed tomographic (CT) scan during follow-up for breast cancer 15 years previously. The tumor showed a solid mass measuring 42 × 32 × 12 mm in extensive contact with the pleura of the apex of the left upper lobe. The edge of the tumor was relatively well-defined with an irregular shape, and a bubblelike area was seen within it. The longitudinal slice high-resolution CT findings showed a flat and thick mass, and its inferior border was distinct and horizontal. The pathological findings by a thoracoscopic lung biopsy showed a localized pulmonary fibrosis of the apex, a so-called pulmonary apical cap (PAC). With the recent advances in CT scan technology, the detection of PACs is very likely to increase, and they must be differentiated from superior sulcus tumors.
  Methotrexate (MTX) has been used as the first-line disease-modifying antirheumatic drug (DMARD) in patients with early progressive rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Several severe side effects such as myelosuppression, hepato-, nephro-, and pulmonary toxicities have been reported. However, the pathogenic mechanism of MTX-induced pulmonary fibrosis is still unknown. Here, we evaluated the morphological and biological changes of the pulmonary fibrosis in mice treated with MTX. Three, four and five weeks after consecutive administration of MTX (3 mg/kg/day), hydroxyproline content in the lung tissues increased significantly to about 2 times higher that of the control level. This result closely reflected to the results of hematoxylin and eosin (HE) and Azan stains. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that MTX treatment resulted in a decrease of alveolar epithelial cells and an increase of fibroblast cells in the mouse lung tissues. When we examined the effects of MTX on primary mouse alveolar epithelial cell (MAEC) and mouse lung fibroblast (MLF) survival in vitro, the efficiency of MTX-induced cytotoxicity and apoptosis in MAEC was more sensitive than MLF cells. Thus, our results indicate that the administration of MTX by an oral route could induce a fibrotic response with cell dysfunction of the alveolar epithelium by which MTX-induced apoptosis. Our results thus suggest that MTX could induce alveolar epithelial cell injury and resulted in the loss of integrity of the alveolar-capillary barrier basement membranes followed by the recruitment and proliferation of myofibroblasts with the deposition of collagens.
  We present a 54-year-old man employed in the field of hard metal manufacturing who complained of progressive dyspnea and weight loss. His chest radiograph showed bilateral fibrosis predominantly distributed in the upper lobes with bilateral pleural effusions, and a strong reduction in lung volume. Lung histopathology showed apical cap-like fibrosis but no giant cell interstitial pneumonia. Electron probe microanalysis detected tungsten deposits in the fibrotic region: we therefore considered this to be a case of hard metal disease. Hard metal disease should be considered as one possibility in the differential diagnosis of upper lobe-dominant pulmonary fibrosis.
  BACKGROUND: A significant genetic component has been described for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). The R131H (rs1801274) polymorphism of the IgG receptor FcgammaRIIa determines receptor affinity for IgG subclasses and is associated with several chronic inflammatory diseases. We investigated whether this polymorphism is associated with IPF susceptibility or progression. METHODS: In a case-control study, we compared the distribution of FcgammaRIIa R131H genotypes in 142 patients with IPF and in 218 controls using allele-specific PCR amplification. RESULTS: No differences in the frequency of FcgammaRIIa genotypes were evident between IPF patients and control subjects. However, significantly impaired pulmonary function at diagnosis was observed in HH compared to RR homozygotes, with evidence of more severe restriction (reduced forced vital capacity (FVC)) and lower diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO). Similarly, increased frequency of the H131 allele was observed in patients with severe disease (DLCO <40% predicted) (0.53 vs. 0.38; p=0.03). Furthermore, the H131 allele was associated with progressive pulmonary fibrosis as determined by >10% drop in FVC and/or >15% fall in DLCO at 12 months after baseline (0.48 vs. 0.33; p=0.023). CONCLUSIONS: These findings support an association between the FcgammaRIIa R131H polymorphism and IPF severity and progression, supporting the involvement of immunological mechanisms in IPF pathogenesis.
  BACKGROUND: Cystic fibrosis is a multi-system disease characterised by the production of thick secretions causing recurrent pulmonary infection, often with unusual bacteria. This leads to lung destruction and eventually death through respiratory failure. There are no antibiotics in development that exert a new mode of action and many of the current antibiotics are ineffective in eradicating the bacteria once chronic infection is established. Antibiotic adjuvants - therapies that act by rendering the organism more susceptible to attack by antibiotics or the host immune system, by rendering it less virulent or killing it by other means, are urgently needed. OBJECTIVES: To determine if antibiotic adjuvants improve clinical and microbiological outcome of pulmonary infection in people with cystic fibrosis. SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cystic Fibrosis Trials Register which is compiled from database searches, hand searches of appropriate journals and conference proceedings.Date of most recent search: 26 August 2010.We also searched MEDLINE (all years) on 21 July 2010. SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised controlled trials and quasi-randomised controlled trials of a therapy exerting an antibiotic adjuvant mechanism of action compared to placebo or no therapy for people with cystic fibrosis. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: The authors independently assessed and extracted data from identified studies. MAIN RESULTS: We identified eighteen studies of which three are included that examined antibiotic adjuvant therapies, five studies are ongoing. The included studies involve the assessment of β-carotene, garlic and zinc supplementation. No therapy demonstrated a significant effect upon pulmonary function, pulmonary exacerbations or quality of life. The study of zinc supplementation reports a reduction in the requirement of oral antibiotics but not of intravenous antibiotics, an effect that is difficult to understand.  AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: We could not identify an antibiotic adjuvant therapy that could be recommended for the treatment of lung infection in those with cystic fibrosis. The emergence of increasingly resistant bacteria makes the reliance on antibiotics alone challenging for cystic fibrosis teams. There is a need to explore alternative strategies, such as the use of adjuvant therapies. Further research is required to provide future therapeutic options.
  Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a common life-threatening autosomal recessive disorder in the Caucasian population, and the gene responsible is the CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). Patients with CF have repeated bacterial infection of the airways caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA), which is one of the predominant pathogen, and endobronchial chronic infection represents a major cause of morbidity and mortality. Pentraxin 3 (PTX3) is a gene that encodes the antimicrobial protein, PTX3, which is believed to have an important role in innate immunity of lung. To address the role of PTX3 in the risk of PA lung colonization, we investigated five single nucleotide polymorphisms of PTX3 gene in 172 Caucasian CF patients who were homozygous for the F508del mutation. We observed that PTX3 haplotype frequencies were significantly different between patients with PA colonization, as compared with noncolonized patients. Moreover, a protective effect was found in association with a specific haplotype (odds ratio 0.524). Our data suggest that variations within PTX3 affect lung colonization of Pseudomonas in patients with CF.Genes and Immunity advance online publication, 7 October 2010; doi:10.1038/gene.2010.41.
  Various anti-inflammatory agents have been used to treat acute or chronic lung injury-induced pulmonary fibrosis. However, the efficacy of the currently available treatments is disappointing and new therapies are urgently needed. In the current study, we investigated the effect of a novel α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (α-MSH) analogue, STY39, on bleomycin-induced pulmonary inflammation and fibrosis in mice. C57BL/6 mice received an intratracheal injection of bleomycin prior to being treated with STY39 (0.625, 1.25 or 2.5 mg/kg, i.p.) once a day for 14 consecutive days. Various parameters, reflecting the inflammatory reaction, metabolism of extracellular matrix, myofibroblast proliferation and degree of fibrosis in the lung, were evaluated. We found that STY39 significantly improved the survival of mice with lethal bleomycin-induced lung injury, limited body weight loss and the increase in the lung index, reduced the mRNA expression of Type I and type? procollagen and the production of hydroxyproline in the lung, diminished myofibroblast proliferation, and ultimately reduced bleomycin-induced lung damage. Further investigation revealed that, in a dose-dependent manner, STY39 treatment inhibited leukocyte migration into the lung, reduced the production of TNF-α, IL-6, macrophage-inflammatory protein-2 (MIP-2) and TGF-β1 in the lung, and altered the ratio of MMP-1 to TIMP-1. These findings suggest that STY39 attenuates bleomycin-induced experimental pulmonary fibrosis by limiting the inflammatory reaction through the inhibition of pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrosis cytokines, and by accelerating the metabolism of extracellular matrix. Therefore, STY39 may be an effective therapy for preventing pulmonary fibrosis.
  BACKGROUND: Malnutrition is an indicator of a poor prognosis in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). Previous body-composition (BC) studies in children with CF used 2-component models (2CMs) to assess fat mass (FM) and fat-free mass (FFM), but to our knowledge no study has used the gold-standard 4-component model (4CM), which allows for a more accurate evaluation of the nature of both elements. OBJECTIVE: We measured BC by using the 4CM in 6-12-y-old children with CF 1) to compare findings with those of healthy, matched control children and reference data; 2) to relate BC to lung spirometry [forced expired volume in 1 s (FEV(1))]; and 3) to compare findings with those from more commonly used 2CM techniques. DESIGN: One hundred clinically stable children with CF (57% girls) aged 6-12 y were measured by using the 4CM. Children with CF underwent spirometry (FEV(1)). RESULTS: Girls with CF had significantly less FM than did healthy girls, even after adjustment for height and pubertal status; boys with CF had higher body mass index SD scores than did healthy boys. FM in girls was positively associated with the FEV(1) percentage predicted. The 2CM FM was significantly different from the 4CM FM, with differences dependent on sex and condition, although most techniques identified a relation between FM and FEV(1) in girls. Conclusions: Although shorter than healthy children, boys with CF were heavier and had a BC within the normal range; however, girls with CF had lower FM than did healthy girls, and this was associated with poorer lung function. Given the worse prognosis in girls, this finding merits more attention. The reliability of 2CM techniques varied with sex and health status.
  BACKGROUND: Pulmonary sarcoidosis shows a remarkable heterogeneity of phenotypes ranging from bihilar lymphadenopathy to progressive fibrosis. Individual disease assessment is demanding and requires sensible, practical measures. We tested whether gas exchange measurements during exercise reflects disease activity and clinical course in sarcoidosis. METHODS: In 149 patients with proven pulmonary sarcoidosis the alveolar-arterial oxygen pressure gradient (P(A-a)O(2)) during exercise was assessed and compared with chest X-ray typing, pulmonary function, single breath-diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DL(CO)), serological markers, cell composition of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and clinical course. Patients were categorized according to thresholds of P(A-a)O(2) during exercise. MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Chest X-ray typing, pulmonary function, DL(CO) and the need for immunosuppressive treatment differed between the disease categories based on P(A-a)O(2) during exercise (p < 0.0001 each). Patients with an impairment of gas exchange during exercise also showed elevated levels of neopterin (p = 0.002) and higher percentages of neutrophils (p = 0.013) and eosinophils (p < 0.0001) in BALF. Multivariate regression analysis showed that forced vital capacity (FVC) (p = 0.009) and P(A-a)O(2) during exercise (p < 0.0001) were independently associated with a prolonged need for immunosuppressive treatment (>1 year), but not DL(CO). About 50% (n = 75) of the study population showed a normal spirometry. Even in this subgroup 23% had an impaired gas exchange during exercise, which correlated with chest X-ray types (p < 0.0001) and the need for immunosuppressive treatment (p < 0.005). CONCLUSIONS: Impaired gas exchange during exercise reflects disease activity and its extent and is associated with a prolonged need for immunosuppressive treatment during follow-up in patients with pulmonary sarcoidosis.
  BACKGROUND: Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is a life-shortening genetic disease in which ~80% of deaths result from loss of lung function linked to inflammation due to chronic bacterial infection (principally Pseudomonas aeruginosa). Pulmonary exacerbations (intermittent episodes during which symptoms of lung infection increase and lung function decreases) can cause substantial resource utilization, morbidity, and irreversible loss of lung function. Intravenous antibiotic treatment to reduce exacerbation symptoms is standard management practice. However, no prospective studies have identified an optimal antibiotic treatment duration and this lack of objective data has been identified as an area of concern and interest. METHODS: We have retrospectively analyzed pulmonary function response data (as forced expiratory volume in one second; FEV1) from a previous blinded controlled CF exacerbation management study of intravenous ceftazidime/tobramycin and meropenem/tobramycin in which spirometry was conducted daily to assess the time course of pulmonary function response. RESULTS: Ninety-five patients in the study received antibiotics for at least 4 days and were included in our analyses. Patients received antibiotics for an average of 12.6 days (median = 13, SD = 3.2 days), with a range of 4 to 27 days. No significant differences were observed in mean or median treatment durations as functions of either treatment group or baseline lung disease stage. Average time from initiation of antibiotic treatment to highest observed FEV1 was 8.7 days (median = 10, SD = 4.0 days), with a range of zero to 19 days. Patients were treated an average of 3.9 days beyond the day of peak FEV1 (median = 3, SD = 3.8 days), with 89 patients (93.7%) experiencing their peak FEV1 improvement within 13 days. There were no differences in mean or median times to peak FEV1 as a function of treatment group, although the magnitude of FEV1 improvement differed between groups. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that antibiotic response to exacerbation as assessed by pulmonary function is essentially complete within 2 weeks of treatment initiation and relatively independent of the magnitude of pulmonary function response observed.
  The development of novel engineered nano-sized materials is a rapidly emerging technology with many applications in medicine and industry. In vitro and in vivo studies have suggested many deleterious effects of carbon nanotube exposure including granulomatous inflammation, release of cytosolic enzymes, pulmonary fibrosis, reactive oxygen damage, cellular atypia, DNA fragmentation, mutation and errors in chromosome number as well as mitotic spindle disruption. The physical properties of the carbon nanotubes make respiratory exposure to workers likely during the production or use of commercial products. Many of the investigations of the genotoxicity of carbon nanotubes have focused on reactive oxygen mediated DNA damage; however, the long thin tubular-shaped carbon nanotubes have a striking similarity to cellular microtubules. The similarity of carbon nanotubes to microtubules suggests a potential to interact with cellular biomolecules, such as the mitotic spindle, as well as the motor proteins that separate the chromosomes during cell division. Disruption of centrosomes and mitotic spindles would result in monopolar, tripolar, and quadrapolar divisions of chromosomes. The resulting aneuploidy is a key mechanism in the potential carcinogenicity of carbon nanotubes.
  Abstract The use of cerium compounds as diesel fuel catalyst results in the emission of cerium oxide nanoparticles (CeO<inf>2</inf>) in the exhaust. This study characterized the potential effects of CeO<inf>2</inf> exposure on lung toxicity. Male Sprague Dawley rats were exposed to CeO<inf>2</inf> by a single intratracheal instillation at 0.15, 0.5, 1, 3.5 or 7 mg/kg body weight. At 1 day after exposure, CeO<inf>2</inf> significantly reduced NO production, but increased IL-12 production, by alveolar macrophages (AM) in response to ex vivo lipopolysacchride (LPS) challenge, and caused AM apoptosis, through activation of caspases 9 and 3. CeO<inf>2</inf> exposure markedly increased suppressor of cytokine signaling-1 at 1-day and elevated arginase-1 at 28-day post exposure in lung cells, while osteopontin was significantly elevated in lung tissue at both time points. CeO<inf>2</inf> induced inflammation, cytotoxicity, air/blood barrier damage, and phospholipidosis with enlarged AM. Thus, CeO<inf>2</inf> induced lung inflammation and injury in lungs which may lead to fibrosis.
  Antineoplastic agents induce the production of free radicals and other reactive oxygen species (ROS) in biological systems. Cytotoxic effects of antineoplastic drugs depend on rapid proliferation of cancer cells. Oxidative stress occurring during chemotherapy may potentially interfere with these effects through reducing the rate of cell proliferation. ROS may also contribute to side effects that occur with chemotherapeutic agents such as doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity, cisplatin-induced nephrotoxicity, and bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis. Lycopene is a major carotenoid present in tomatoes, and it is a potent antioxidant that may provide protection against cellular damage caused by ROS. Lycopene may reduce or prevent the side effects of chemotherapy due to its antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties. This review focuses on the protective effects of lycopene against antineoplastic agent induced toxicity.
  An excess of neutrophils in the alveoli and lung interstitium has been described in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). Engagement of neutrophil Fcγ receptors with IgG complexes may contribute to the pathogenesis of IPF. The neutrophil FcγRIIIb receptor occurs in two codominantly expressed allelic variants, NA1 and NA2, which exhibit different binding affinities for IgG1 and IgG3 subclasses. The aim of this study was to investigate whether FcγRIIIb genotype is associated with IPF susceptibility or disease progression. In a case-control study we compared the distribution of FcγRIIIb NA1/2 polymorphisms in 142 patients with IPF and in 218 controls using allele-specific PCR amplification. Significant skewing in the distribution of FcγRIIIb genotypes was observed between patients with IPF and control subjects. In the IPF cohort, there was higher frequency of the NA1/NA1 genotype (0.19 vs. 0.07), and lower NA2/NA2 frequency (0.31 vs. 0.50; χ(2) = 17.71, df = 2, P < 0.001). The overall frequency of the NA1 allele was increased in IPF patients compared to controls (0.44 vs. 0.29; P < 0.0001, odds ratio [OR] = 1.93, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.42-2.64). Heterozygotes and homozygotes of the NA1 allele were at higher risk of developing IPF (OR = 2.19, 95% CI = 1.40-3.41, P = 0.0005), whereas the NA2 allele was protective against IPF (OR = 0.34, 95% CI = 0.17-0.65, P = 0.0014). There was no association of FcγRIIIb genotype with disease progression as assessed by serial lung function measurements. FcγRIIIb NA1/2 polymorphisms are associated with IPF disease susceptibility. These results support a role for immunological mechanisms contributing to IPF pathogenesis.
  OBJECTIVE: To test observer agreement and two strategies for possible improvement (consensus meeting and reference images) for the modified Chrispin-Norman score for children with cystic fibrosis (CF). METHODS: Before and after a consensus meeting and after developing reference images three observers scored sets of 25 chest radiographs from children with CF. Observer agreement was tested for line, ring, mottled and large soft shadows, for overinflation and for the composite modified Chrispin-Norman score. Correlation with lung function was assessed. RESULTS: Before the consensus meeting agreement between observers 1 and 2 was moderate-good, but with observer 3 agreement was poor-fair. Scores correlated significantly with spirometry for observers 1 and 2 (-0.72<R<-0.42, P < 0.05), but not for observer 3. Agreement with observer 3 improved after the consensus meeting. Reference images improved agreement for overinflation and mottled and large shadows and correlation with lung function, but agreement for the modified Chrispin-Norman score did not improve further. CONCLUSION: Consensus meetings and reference images improve among-observer agreement for the modified Chrispin-Norman score, but good agreement was not achieved among all observers for the modified Chrispin-Norman score and for bronchial line and ring shadows.
  The management of persistent air leaks (PALs) is one of the most common problems in general thoracic surgery, especially after elective pulmonary resections. The statistically most frequent air leak is caused by alveolar-pleural fistula (APF), which is defined as a link between the pulmonary parenchyma distal to a segmental bronchus, and the pleural space. Prolonged air leaks result in an increase in patient's hospital length of stay with possible infectious complications, aside from an overall hospitalization cost increase. The ability to discharge a patient who would otherwise depend on continuous aspiration, because chronic PALs represent a very important clinical and technological improvement. We describe the case of a patient with chronic PALs and pneumothorax due to pulmonary fibrosis secondary to rheumatoid arthritis, with diffuse pulmonary nodules, in which surgical attempts to manage air leaks were ineffective. He was successfully home-assisted with a new chest drainage system with automatic constant negative suction pressure.
  Hemoglobinopathies are diseases caused by genetic mutations that result in abnormal, dysfunctional hemoglobin molecules or lower levels of normal hemoglobin molecules. The most common hemoglobinopathies are sickle cell disease (SCD) and the thalassemias. In SCD, an abnormal hemoglobin alters the erythrocyte, causing a chronic hemolytic anemia, which can lead to pulmonary parenchymal damage and impaired vascular function. Pulmonary complications of SCD include the acute chest syndrome (ACS), reactive airways disease, pulmonary hypertension (PH), and pulmonary fibrosis. Episodes of ACS and the development of PH both increase the risk of death in patients with SCD. Both α and β thalassemia are characterized by impaired production of hemoglobin subunits, and severity of disease varies widely. Although screening studies suggest that PH is a common complication for patients with thalassemia, its impact on survival is unknown. Understanding the pathogenesis, diagnostic options, and prevention and treatment strategies for such complications is critical for clinicians who care for these patients. In this review, we discuss the mechanisms and clinical presentation of pulmonary complications associated with hemoglobinopathies, with a focus on recent advances in pathogenesis and treatment.
  End stage pulmonary emphysema is the most common indication for lung transplantation worldwide. The shortness of donor organs and the better natural prognosis compared to other diseases leading to transplantation such as pulmonary fibrosis and cystic fibrosis demands careful patient selection.Lung transplantation is considered in patients with declining lung function after receiving all conservative treatment options including smoking cessation and rehabilitation programmes. Preoperative evaluation using consensus criteria needs to be performed by a multidisciplinary team in specialized centres. Assessment of co-morbidities is crucial, as they may significantly increase transplant-related mortality. The largest survival advantage from lung transplantation has been shown for the subgroup of patients below 60 years of age presenting with end-stage obstructive lung disease (FEV1 < 20% predicted) and respiratory failure. Similarly, high risk patients with secondary pulmonary hypertension or cachexia (BMI < 20) will likely benefit from transplantation.The 5-year-survival rate averages 60 percent, with superior outcome following double versus single lung transplantation. A clear survival benefit can only be achieved in a subgroup of patients, whereas the impact on quality of life seems to be even more important in patients suffering from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
  OBJECTIVE: To increase clinician adherence to prescribing guidelines for pulmonary medications in children with cystic fibrosis (CF). DESIGN: Quality improvement project with multiple time series design. SETTING: The CF center at a tertiary care pediatric hospital in the United States. PATIENTS: Children with CF who were eligible to receive oral azithromycin, nebulized dornase alfa, or inhaled tobramycin sulfate based on prescribing guidelines for CF lung disease. INTERVENTION: Evidence-based prescribing guidelines were designed by a local committee to reflect consensus recommendations from the CF Foundation. Clinicians and families were educated about guidelines. Adherence to prescribing guidelines was tracked using a local CF database and record reviews. Weekly meetings were used to highlight adherence failures and promote clinician accountability. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: The rate of clinician adherence to prescribing guidelines. RESULTS: One hundred seventy patients with CF were included. At the start of the project, the rate of clinician adherence to prescribing guidelines was 62%. After 3 months of the project, the rate of clinician adherence to prescribing guidelines was 87% (odds ratio = 4.6; 95% confidence interval, 3.0-7.0). The improvements in adherence to prescribing guidelines were sustained for 21 months of follow-up. CONCLUSIONS: Educating clinicians about prescribing guidelines, sharing guidelines with families, and monitoring clinician adherence improve prescribing adherence to evidence-based recommendations.
  Context: Recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH) improves growth in patients with growth hormone deficiency or idiopathic short stature. Its role in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) is unclear. Objective: To review the effectiveness of rhGH in the treatment of patients with CF. Methods: Medline and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials were searched from the earliest date through April 2010. Randomized controlled trials, observational studies, systematic reviews/meta-analyses, or case reports were included if rhGH therapy was administered to patients with CF and data on prespecified harms, intermediate outcomes, or final health outcomes were reported. When applicable, end points were pooled by using a random-effects model. The overall body of evidence was graded for each outcome as insufficient, low, moderate, or high. Results: Ten unique controlled trials (n = 312) and 8 observational studies (n = 58) were included. On quantitative synthesis of controlled trials, several markers of pulmonary function, anthropometrics, and bone mineralization were significantly improved versus control. Results of single-arm observational studies for the aforementioned outcomes were generally supportive of findings in clinical trials. There is insufficient evidence to determine the effect of rhGH on intravenous antibiotic use during therapy, pulmonary exacerbations, health-related quality-of-life, bone consequences, or total mortality, but moderate evidence suggests that rhGH therapy reduces the rate of hospitalization versus control. Conclusions: rhGH improved almost all intermediate measures of pulmonary function, height, and weight in patients with CF. Improvements in bone mineral content are also promising. However, with the exception of hospitalizations, the benefits on final health outcomes cannot be directly determined at this time.
  BACKGROUND: Once daily dosing of aminoglycosides is widely used but is limited by the inconvenience of the slow infusion it requires and is associated by three-times daily infusion of a beta-lactam. Twice daily tobramycin can be given as a slow IV bolus and may be more convenient. This study compares twice with three-times daily dosing of both tobramycin and ceftazidime. METHODS: This was a randomised, open-label, parallel group trial. CF patients presenting with an infective exacerbation were randomised to either twice or three-times daily ceftazidime and tobramycin. Markers of treatment efficacy and safety were measured in the two groups. The primary outcome measure was an improvement in FEV1. RESULTS: 146 patients were randomised into the study. There was no significant difference in the two groups for improvement in FEV1% predicted (9.93% and 7.98% for twice daily and three-times daily respectively) and similar times to next exacerbation. There were no differences in the incidence of treatment failure, nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity. DISCUSSION: This study confirms that twice daily dosing of both tobramycin and ceftazidime is safe and effective and may be considered more convenient than current dosing schedules.
  Pulmonary fibrosis associated with amyopathic dermatomyositis (ADM) is known to have a generally aggressive course and is ultimately fatal. We report the case of a 50-year-old patient with ADM, who developed progressive interstitial pneumonia that was unresponsive to corticosteroids and multiple immunosuppressive agents, including cyclosporine and tacrolimus hydrate. Five courses of lecithinized superoxide dismutase (PC-SOD) were administered without adverse effects. Improvements in physiological parameters, such as pulmonary function and exercise tolerance, as well as the serum Krebs von den Lungen 6 (KL-6) level, were observed. This is the first report of a case of steroid-refractory interstitial pneumonia treated with PC-SOD.
  Cystic fibrosis related diabetes (CFRD) is the most common co-morbidity in persons with cystic fibrosis (CF). As the life expectancy of persons with CF continues to increase, the need to proactively diagnose and aggressively treat CFRD and its potential complications has become more apparent. CFRD negatively impacts lung function, growth and mortality, making its diagnosis and management crucial in a population already at high risk for early mortality. Compared to type 1 and type 2 diabetes, CFRD is a unique entity, requiring a thorough understanding of its unique pathophysiology to facilitate the creation and utilization of an effective medical treatment plan. The physiology of CFRD is complex, likely consisting of a combination of insulin deficiency, insulin resistance and a genetic predisposition towards the development of diabetes. However, the hallmark of CFRD is insulin deficiency, necessitating the use of exogenous insulin as the mainstay of therapy. Insulin administration, in combination with a multidisciplinary team of health professionals with expertise in the care of patients with CF and CFRD, is the cornerstone of the care for these patients. The goals of treatment of the CFRD population are to reverse protein catabolism, maintain a healthy weight, and reduce acute and chronic diabetes complications. Creating a partnership between the treatment team and the patient is the ideal way to accomplish these goals and is essential for successful diabetes care.
  Objectives: To describe the findings of cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) associated with connective tissue disease (CTD) and in consecutive patients with systemic sclerosis (SSc) without PAH. Methods: The study comprised nine consecutive patients who were admitted for right heart catheterization (RHC) under a suspicion of CTD-PAH and 25 consecutive patients who were admitted for evaluation because of a clinical suspicion of SSc. In addition to the regular assessment, they also underwent examination by CMR. Results: CMR measurements of right ventricular (RV) volumes and function showed severe pathology in patients with CTD-PAH. Patients with SSc without PAH had similar but much less severe findings. Right ventricular end-diastolic volume (RVEDV) and right ventricular ejection fraction (RVEF) were abnormal in all patients with CTD-PAH. In eight out of nine patients with CTD-PAH, fibrosis was seen in the RV insertion point, probably caused by increased tension, but only in one of the consecutive SSc patients. This patient was diagnosed with CTD-PAH 20 months later. Conclusions: In CTD-PAH, CMR shows severe changes in RV volumes and function, but also fibrosis in the RV insertion point. Similar abnormalities, although much less severe, may be seen at diagnosis of SSc. Further evaluation is warranted to determine whether these findings are of value in screening for early signs of PAH in SSc.
  This article reviews the latest findings on how extracellular signaling controls cell fate determination during the process of biofilm formation by Bacillus subtilis in the artificial setting of the laboratory. To complement molecular genetic approaches, surface-associated communities in settings as diverse as the pitcher plant Sarracenia purpurea and the human lung were investigated. The study of the pitcher plant revealed that the presence or absence of a mosquito larva in the pitcher plant controlled bacterial diversity in the ecosystem inside the pitcher plant. Through the analysis of the respiratory tract microbiota of humans suffering from cystic fibrosis (CF) a correlation between lung function and bacterial community diversity was found. Those that had lungs in good condition had also more diverse communities, whereas patients harboring Pseudomonas aeruginosa-the predominant CF pathogen-in their lungs had less diverse communities. Further studies focused on interspecies and intraspecies relationships at the molecular level in search for signaling molecules that would promote biofilm formation. Two molecules were found that induced biofilm formation in B. subtilis: nystatin-released by other species-and surfactin-released by B. subtilis itself. This is a role not previously known for two molecules that were known for other activities-nystatin as an antifungal and surfactin as a surfactant. In addition, surfactin was found to also trigger cannibalism under starvation. This could be a strategy to maintain the population because the cells destroyed serve as nutrients for the rest. The path that led the author to the study of microbial biofilms is also described.
  Cyclophilin D (which is encoded by the Ppif gene) is a mitochondrial matrix peptidyl-prolyl isomerase known to modulate opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (MPTP). Apart from regulating necrotic cell death, the physiologic function of the MPTP is largely unknown. Here we have shown that Ppif(-/-) mice exhibit substantially greater cardiac hypertrophy, fibrosis, and reduction in myocardial function in response to pressure overload stimulation than control mice. In addition, Ppif(-/-) mice showed greater hypertrophy and lung edema as well as reduced survival in response to sustained exercise stimulation. Cardiomyocyte-specific transgene expression of cyclophilin D in Ppif(-/-) mice rescued the enhanced hypertrophy, reduction in cardiac function, and rapid onset of heart failure following pressure overload stimulation. Mechanistically, the maladaptive phenotype in the hearts of Ppif(-/-) mice was associated with an alteration in MPTP-mediated Ca(2+) efflux resulting in elevated levels of mitochondrial matrix Ca(2+) and enhanced activation of Ca(2+)-dependent dehydrogenases. Elevated matrix Ca(2+) led to increased glucose oxidation relative to fatty acids, thereby limiting the metabolic flexibility of the heart that is critically involved in compensation during stress. These findings suggest that the MPTP maintains homeostatic mitochondrial Ca(2+) levels to match metabolism with alterations in myocardial workload, thereby suggesting a physiologic function for the MPTP.
  RATIONALE: Stenotrophomonas maltophilia is one of the more common multi-drug resistant organisms isolated from the respiratory tract of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients but the effect of chronic S. maltophilia infection on CF lung disease is unknown. OBJECTIVE: To determine the impact of chronic S. maltophilia infection on lung disease in CF. METHODS: We developed a serologic assay specific for S. maltophilia and in a cross-sectional study, measured serum antibodies to S. maltophilia in CF patients to determine if a definition of chronic S. maltophilia isolation based on culture results corresponded to an immunologic response (serologic study). We then used this validated definition to examine the effect of chronic S. maltophilia on the severity of lung disease in a retrospective cohort study using the Toronto CF Database from 1997-2008 (cohort study). MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Serum antibody levels to S. maltophilia were measured in 179 CF patients. Patients with chronic S. maltophilia had significantly higher mean antibody levels to S. maltophilia flagellin (p<0.0001) and whole cell (p=0.0004) compared to patients with intermittent or no S. maltophilia. The cohort study included 692 patients with an average follow-up of 8.3 years. In an adjusted log linear model, patients with chronic S. maltophilia infection had a significantly increased risk of pulmonary exacerbation requiring hospitalization and antibiotics compared to patients who had never had S. maltophilia (RR=1.63, p=0.0002). CONCLUSIONS: Chronic S. maltophilia infection in CF patients is associated with a specific immune response to this organism and is an independent risk factor for pulmonary exacerbations.
  Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a devastating lung disease that is characterized by excessive proliferation of fibroblasts. The lipid mediator prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) has the capacity to limit fibrosis through its inhibition of numerous functions of these fibroblasts; however, in the setting of fibrosis, fibroblasts have been shown to be resistant to PGE2. We have linked such resistance to decreased expression levels of the E prostanoid 2 (EP2) receptor. In this study, in fibroblasts from both mice and humans with pulmonary fibrosis, we show that DNA hypermethylation is responsible for diminished EP2 expression levels and PGE2 resistance. Bisulfite sequencing of the prostaglandin E receptor 2 gene (PTGER2) promoter revealed that fibrotic fibroblasts exhibit greater PTGER2 methylation than nonfibrotic control cells. Treatment with the DNA methylation inhibitors 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and zebularine as well as DNA methyltransferase-specific siRNA decreased PTGER2 methylation, increased EP2 mRNA and protein expression levels, and restored PGE2 responsiveness in fibrotic fibroblasts but not in nonfibrotic controls. PTGER2 promoter hypermethylation was driven by an increase in Akt signal transduction. In addition to results described for the PTGER2 promoter, fibrotic fibroblasts also exhibited increased global DNA methylation. These findings demonstrate that the down-regulation of PTGER2 and consequent PGE2 resistance are both mediated by DNA hypermethylation; we identified increased Akt signal transduction as a novel mechanism that promotes DNA hypermethylation during fibrogenesis.
  Substance P (SP) and the neurokinin-1 receptor (NK-1R) are involved in the development of colitis and mucosal healing after colonic inflammation. We studied whether SP modulates colonic fibrosis by using a chronic model of trinitrobenzenesulfonic acid (TNBS)-induced colitis in wild-type (WT) and NK-1R-deficient (NK-1R KD) mice. We found increased mRNA expression levels of collagen, vimentin, and the fibrogenic factors transforming growth factor β1 and insulin-like growth factor 1 in the chronically inflamed colons of WT mice treated with repeated intracolonic TNBS administrations. Fibrosis in TNBS-treated mice was also evident immunohistochemically by collagen deposition in the colon. Treatment of TNBS-exposed WT mice with the NK-1R antagonist CJ-12255 reduced colonic inflammation, colonic fibrosis, fibroblast accumulation, and expression levels of the fibrogenic factors. NK-1R knockout mice chronically exposed to TNBS had similar colonic inflammation compared with WT, but reduced colonic fibrosis, fibroblast accumulation, and expression levels of fibrogenic factors. Immunohistochemical staining also showed co-localization of NK-1R with fibroblasts in inflamed colons of mice and in colonic mucosa of patients with Crohn's disease. Exposure of human colonic CCD-18Co fibroblasts to SP (10 nmol/L) increased cell migration. SP stimulated collagen synthesis in CCD-18Co fibroblasts in the presence of transforming growth factor β1 and insulin-like growth factor 1, and this effect was reduced by Akt inhibition. Thus, SP, via NK-1R, promotes intestinal fibrogenesis after chronic colitis by stimulating fibrotic responses in fibroblasts.
  Hypoxia-induced mitogenic factor (HIMF), also known as found in inflammatory zone 1 and resistin-like molecule α, belongs to a novel class of cysteine-rich secreted proteins. It exhibits mitogenic and chemotactic properties during pulmonary hypertension-associated vascular remodeling, as well as fibrogenic properties during pulmonary fibrosis. HIMF expression in the lung was reported to be regulated by Th2 cytokines (IL-4 and IL-13) via the transcription factor STAT6 pathway in a bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis model. However, in this study, we found that in the hypoxia-induced pulmonary hypertension model, lung HIMF expression is increased in IL-4 and STAT6 knockout (KO) mice to the same degree as in wild-type (WT) mice, suggesting that induction of HIMF expression does not require Th2 regulation in this model. We also found that HIMF-induced proliferative activity, hypertrophy, collagen, and extracellular matrix deposition in the pulmonary arteries are significantly less in IL-4 KO mice than in WT mice. In addition, HIMF-induced production of angiogenic factors/chemokines, such as vascular endothelial growth factor, MCP-1, and stromal-derived factor-1, in the lung resident cells, as well as macrophage infiltration, were significantly suppressed in the lungs of IL-4 KO mice. We also show that IL-4 was significantly increased in the lungs of HIMF-treated WT mice. Our in vitro studies using pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells revealed that HIMF stimulated cell proliferation, vascular endothelial growth factor expression, and MCP-1 production in a manner that is dependent on the IL-4/IL-4Rα system. These findings suggest that IL-4 signaling may play a significant role in HIMF-induced lung inflammation and vascular remodeling.
  Pulmonary disease is the most important cause of morbidity and mortality in cystic fibrosis (CF). Most patients with CF die from respiratory failure with extensive airway destruction. Airway remodelling, defined as structural airway wall changes, begins early in life in CF but the sequence of remodelling events in the disease process is poorly understood. Airway remodelling in CF has traditionally been thought to be solely the consequence of repeated cycles of inflammation and infection. However, new evidence obtained from developmental, physiological and histopathological studies suggests that there might instead be multiple mechanisms leading to airway remodelling in CF including (1) changes related to infection and inflammation; (2) changes specific to CF as a result of CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) dysfunction in the airway wall, independent of infection and inflammation; and (3) protective responses to (1) and/or (2). Recent advances in bronchoscopic techniques have allowed airway mucosal (endobronchial) biopsies to be taken in children and even infants. Endobronchial biopsy studies may provide insight into the role and relative contribution of the different mechanisms of airway remodelling in CF, with the main limitation that they assess only changes in proximal large airways and not in peripheral small airways from where CF disease is thought to originate. Findings from biopsy studies could encourage the development of novel therapeutic strategies targeting structural changes in addition to infection and inflammation.
  BACKGROUND:: Lung transplantation is the recognized therapy for end-stage respiratory failure. Many serious medical complications have been described occurring from months to years after lung transplantation, often necessitating admission to an intensive care unit (ICU). We examined the factors associated with death. METHODS:: All consecutive lung transplant recipients who were readmitted to the ICU > 30 days after transplantation from 2000 to 2009 were included in this retrospective study. Data were collected regarding demographic parameters, ICU stay, and outcome. RESULTS:: During the study period, 40 patients were admitted to the ICU. The main pre-transplant diagnosis was idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, followed by chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Most patients (93%) required mechanical ventilation during their ICU stay. The main reason for ICU admission was septic shock in 22 patients (55%). An organism was isolated from 19 of these patients; in 11 patients, the organism was multidrug resistant. The ICU mortality was 62.5%. Non-survivors were characterized by more frequent readmissions to hospital (p = 0.02), a higher admission Sequential Organ Failure Assessment score (p = 0.02), an admission diagnosis of sepsis (87.5% vs 37.5% for all other diagnoses, p < 0.001), and a requirement for mechanical ventilation (p = 0.02). The incidence of bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome was also significantly higher in non-survivors (p = 0.02). CONCLUSIONS:: Severe sepsis remains the most important factor associated with a poor outcome after readmission to ICU. New strategies are required to alter the course of this common complication of lung transplantation.
  BACKGROUND: The chitinase-like protein YKL-40 is a serum biomarker in diseases with fibrosis, inflammation and tissue remodelling. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a progressive interstitial lung disease that is hallmarked by these processes. The aim of this study was to investigate the potential of YKL-40 as a prognostic biomarker for survival in IPF patients. METHODS: Serum and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) levels of YKL-40 at the time of diagnosis and a promoter polymorphism in CHI3L1, the gene encoding YKL-40, were determined in 85 IPF patients and 126 controls. The relationship between YKL-40 levels and clinical parameters was evaluated. Kaplan-Meier and Cox regression analyses were used to examine the association between YKL-40 levels and survival. RESULTS: Serum and BALF YKL-40 levels were significantly higher in patients than in healthy controls (p < 0.001). The - 329 A/G polymorphism had a significant influence on BALF YKL-40 levels and the influence on serum YKL-40 levels showed a trend towards significance in IPF patients. IPF patients with high (> 79 ng/ml) serum or high BALF YKL-40 (> 17 ng/ml) levels had significantly shorter survival than those with low YKL-40 levels in serum or BALF. In patients with both low serum and low BALF YKL-40 levels no IPF related mortality was observed. Cox regression modelling showed that there were no confounding factors. CONCLUSIONS: The - 329 polymorphism was associated with serum and BALF YKL-40 levels in IPF patients. High serum and BALF YKL-40 levels are associated with poor survival in IPF patients and could be useful prognostic markers for survival in IPF.
  BACKGROUND: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is characterised by impaired mucociliary clearance (MCC), chronic inflammation and infection, and progressively deteriorating lung function. Inhaled mannitol (Bronchitol) has been shown to increase MCC and cough clearance and FEV(1) in CF patients, contributing to better lung hygiene and consequently a slower decline in lung function. This study was designed to determine the dose relationship of mannitol treatment and improvement in FEV(1) and FVC as well as safety. METHODS: This was a randomised, open-label, crossover, dose response study. Following a 2-week treatment with mannitol 400mg b.i.d., 48 CF patients with a mean (SD) FEV(1) % predicted of 64 (13.2), received a further 3 treatments with 40mg, 120mg or 240mg b.i.d. for 2weeks each, in random order. RESULTS: The study demonstrated a dose dependent increase in FEV(1) and FVC. The 400mg dose showed the greatest improvement and the 40mg dose had no discernible effect. The mean percent change in FEV(1) was -1.57%, 3.61%, 3.87% and 8.75% respectively for the 40mg, 120mg, 240mg and 400mg treatments. There was a statistically significant change in FEV(1) for 400mg compared to 40mg (p<0.0001) but the difference with 120mg and 240mg did not reach significance. The mean % change in FVC was -0.90, 1.74, 3.07 and 8.14, for the 40mg, 120mg, 240mg and 400mg treatment arms, with p=0.0001, p=0.0037 and p=0.0304 respectively when compared to 400mg. The highest tested dose of 400mg had a similar safety profile to the other doses tested. The change in FEV(1) and FVC by dose in the paediatric age group (<18years) was similar to the results in the adult population. CONCLUSION: Based on these results the 400mg b.i.d. dose has been further studied in phase III trials.
  BACKGROUND:: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an inherited condition that causes progressive respiratory failure and is the third most common indication for adult bilateral lung transplantation. Post-transplant hyperlipidemia commonly affects lung transplant recipients, but the impact of lung transplantation on serum lipids in the adult CF population is not well studied. The aim of this study was to examine the impact of lung transplantation on the prevalence of hyperlipidemia in CF adults. METHODS:: We retrospectively analyzed prospectively collected data in 108 CF adults undergoing bilateral sequential lung transplantation from 1996 to 2007 at our institution. RESULTS:: The prevalence of hypercholesterolemia (>5.2 mmol/liter) and hypertriglyceridemia (>2.2 mmol/liter) increased significantly after lung transplant (14.8% vs 32.4%, p = 0.002; 8.3% vs 41.7%, p < 0.0001, respectively). Cyclosporine A (CsA) use was associated with significantly higher post-transplant total and LDL cholesterol compared with tacrolimus use. Post-transplant calculated Framingham risk score was <10% in all but 1 subject. CONCLUSION:: Hyperlipidemia was common in our cohort of post-lung transplant CF adults, with a higher prevalence in those receiving CsA. Despite these findings, calculated cardiovascular risk remained low and none of these subjects developed clinically evident cardiovascular disease.
  Physical activity and exercise training play an important role in the clinical management of patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). Exercise training is more common and recognized as an essential part of rehabilitation programmes and overall CF care. Regular exercise training is associated with improved aerobic and anaerobic capacity, higher pulmonary function, and enhanced airway mucus clearance. Furthermore, patients with higher aerobic fitness have an improved survival. Aerobic and anaerobic training may have different effects, while the combination of both have been reported to be beneficial in CF. However, exercise training remains underutilised and not always incorporated into routine CF management. We provide an update on aerobic and anaerobic responses to exercise and general training recommendations in children and adolescents with CF. We propose that an active lifestyle and exercise training are an efficacious part of regular CF patient management.
  Silica and asbestos cause pneumoconioses known as silicosis and asbestosis, respectively, that are each characterized by progressive pulmonary fibrosis. On the other hand, silicosis patients often suffer from a type of immunological dysregulation that gives rise to autoimmunity. These epidemiological findings suggest that silica may affect the immune system in humans. In addition, as asbestos itself is a mineral silicate, it may possess generalized immunotoxicological effects similar to those associated with silica particles. Because asbestos-exposed patients are well-known to often develop malignant diseases such as lung cancer and mesothelioma, one silica-like dysregulatory outcome that needs to be considered (apart from autoimmunity) is an alteration in host tumor immunity. In this review, the immunotoxicological effects of both silica and asbestos are presented and discussed in terms of immune system dysregulation as manifested by the onset of autoimmunity or alterations in host tumor immunity.
  Abstract BACKGROUND: Miners inhale dust at work, and are at a risk of developing coal workers' pneumoconiosis (CWP), a preventable and potentially fatal lung disease. After regulations were implemented in the 1970s, declines were reported in both dust levels and the prevalence of simple and advanced CWP until about 2001, when despite stable reported dust levels, disease levels sharply increased. METHODS: A structured retrospective chart review was performed to describe the demographics and disease progression for 138 coal miners with progressive massive fibrosis whose claims were approved by the West Virginia State Occupational Pneumoconiosis Board (Board) between January 2000 and December 2009. RESULTS: Progressive massive fibrosis (PMF), a complication of CWP, developed in 138 West Virginia coal miners at a mean age of 52.6 years after an average of 30 years work tenure. The time of progression averaged 12.2 years from the last normal chest film until PMF was detected. Lung function declined sharply in both smokers and nonsmokers, averaging 87 ml/yr, for FEV(1) and 74 ml/yr for FVC. The Board has confirmed 21 deaths in this group. The most common job activities were operating continuous mining machines (41%) and roof bolting (19%). Virtually all of these miners' dust exposures occurred after the implementation of current Federal dust regulations. CONCLUSIONS: Contemporary occupational dust exposures have resulted over the last decade in rapidly progressive pneumoconiosis and massive fibrosis in relatively young West Virginia coal miners, leading to important lung dysfunction and premature death.
  ABSTRACT BACKGROUND: The diagnostic gold standard for neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia of infancy (NEHI) is demonstration of increased numbers of neuroendocrine cells amidst otherwise near-normal lung histology. Typical clinical and radiographic features are often present. However, neuroendocrine cells are also increased after lung injury and in other disorders, which can complicate biopsy interpretation and diagnosis of suspected NEHI. Our objective was to determine whether neuroendocrine cell prominence is specific for the diagnosis of NEHI. METHODS: Bombesin immunoreactivity was quantified in lung biopsies from 13 children with characteristic clinical presentation and imaging appearance of NEHI. The primary comparison group was thirteen age-matched cases, selected from children with lung disorders known to be associated with neuroendocrine cell prominence. RESULTS: Bombesin-immunopositive epithelial area was significantly increased in NEHI compared to other diseases. Patchy bronchiolar inflammation or fibrosis was frequently observed in NEHI, with no direct association between airway histopathology and bombesin-immunopositive area. Neuroendocrine cell prominence correlated with severity of small airway obstruction demonstrated on infant pulmonary function testing. Immunohistochemical co-localization of bombesin with Ki67 did not reveal active neuroendocrine cell proliferation. There was wide intra- and inter-subject variability in neuroendocrine cell number, which did not relate to radiographic appearance of the region(s) biopsied. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that neuroendocrine cell prominence is a distinguishing feature of NEHI independent of airway injury. The extent of intra-subject variability and potential for overlap with disease controls suggest that clinical-radiologic-pathologic correlation is required for diagnosis, and that the abundance of neuroendocrine cells may not fully explain the disease pathogenesis.
  Objective. The clinical course of SSc depends on subtype, organ involvement and age. Few data are reported on patients suffering from late-onset SSc. Methods. We analysed data from 8554 patients prospectively followed in the EULAR Scleroderma Trials and Research (EUSTAR) group database. Late-onset SSc was defined as onset of non-RP disease features at or beyond 75 years of age. Disease characteristics, clinical features, disease course and mortality were evaluated. Results. A total of 123 patients with SSc onset at or beyond 75 years of age were identified. Compared with patients <75 years they had more frequently limited than diffuse SSc and a higher prevalence of anti-centromere autoantibodies. Fewer old patients had digital ulcers. The modified Rodnan's skin score, the prevalence of lung fibrosis and renal crisis did not differ significantly between groups. Pulmonary hypertension (PH) measured by echocardiography was more prevalent in the late-onset group, as well as arterial hypertension and diastolic dysfunction. Late-onset SSc remained a positive predictor for PH in multivariate analyses. No significant difference of the two groups in skin score or diffusion capacity was observed during follow-up. Mortality due to SSc was higher in the late-onset group, but the survival time from diagnosis was longer compared with the younger patients. Conclusion. Late-onset SSc shows a distinct clinical presentation and outcome. Patients with late-onset SSc suffer more frequently from the limited subtype and PH, but fewer patients have digital ulcers. PH may in part be determined by underlying cardiovascular disease.
  BACKGROUND: Reducing nebulisation times for tobramycin solution for inhalation in cystic fibrosis (CF) may improve compliance. METHODS: In this single-dose, open-label, two-way crossover study, 13 subjects (7 CF, 6 healthy) were randomised to receive tobramycin via eFlow rapid or LC Plus jet nebuliser. Drug deposition in the lung using gamma scintigraphic imaging, nebulisation times, pharmacokinetics, and safety were evaluated. RESULTS: In CF patients, whole-lung deposition was 40% less with the eFlow rapid compared with LC Plus nebulisers was (8.9±0.8%, and 15.1±6.0%, p>0.05). Nebulisation time was shorter with eFlow rapid compared to LC Plus (7.0min versus 20.0min, p<0.05). Lung deposition in healthy subjects was comparable between both devices. CONCLUSIONS: eFlow rapid reduces the nebulisation time of tobramycin and can potentially improved compliance in patients with CF.
  Radiation therapy often plays a critical role in the treatment of thymic malignancies. However, because of the location of these tumors, historically patients have been at a significant risk for radiation-related toxicity such as pericardial effusions, radiation pneumonitis, long-term pulmonary fibrosis, and occasional long-term esophageal stricture, particularly for unresectable thymoma. Recent advancements in technology have provided the treating radiation oncologist with the ability to more accurately target the region at risk while sparing normal structures. In this review, we provide an overview of key advances in radiation techniques for thymoma over the past two decades. These techniques include 3D conformal therapy, intensity-modulated radiation therapy, 4D treatment planning, adaptive radiation therapy, and proton therapy. Each advancement has brought with it unique advantages in maintaining long-term disease control while improving quality of life in this manageable disease.
  Dyskeratosis congenita (DC) is an inherited disease associated with nail dystrophy, abnormal skin pigmentation, oral leukoplakia, bone marrow failure and a predisposition to cancer. DC is a disease of defective telomere maintenance and patients with DC have very short telomeres. To date, mutations in six genes of telomerase and telomere components have been identified in patients with DC. Recently, mutations in telomerase and telomere components were also identified in patients with aplastic anemia, pulmonary fibrosis, and liver diseases who did not have mucocutaneous manifestations. These findings imply that defective telomere maintenance may cause not only classical DC but also a broad spectrum of diseases previously thought to be idiopathic, and have led to a new concept of diseases, termed "syndromes of telomere shortening". An understanding of the role of telomeres in these diseases is indispensable for diagnosis, genetic counseling and clinical management.
  Background Patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) with Pseudomonas aeruginosa lung infections produce endobronchial mucus plugs allowing growth of obligate anaerobes including Prevotella spp. Whether obligate anaerobes contribute to the pathophysiology of CF lung disease is unknown. Methods The virulence of Prevotella intermedia and Ps aeruginosa was investigated in vitro and in mice, antibodies against P intermedia in CF sera were assessed and a culture-independent detection method for P intermedia/P nigrescens in CF sputum was tested. Results P intermedia reached cell numbers of >10(5)->10(7)&emsp14;colony-forming units (CFU)/ml sputum. The majority of patients with CF (16/17; 94.1%) produced antibodies against two immunoreactive antigens of P intermedia. Culture supernatant fluids, collected from 10(9) P intermedia cells, were more cytotoxic to respiratory epithelial cells in vitro and inflammatory in mouse lungs than respective fluids from anaerobically grown Ps aeruginosa, while fluids from aerobically grown Ps aeruginosa had the highest cytotoxicity and inflammation. Both pathological effects were largely reduced when culture supernatant fluids from 10(7) cells of either species were used. P intermedia cells (∼10(6)CFU/lung) did not induce mortality in the agar beads lung infection mouse model, while Ps aeruginosa cells caused death in 30% of mice due to rapid multiplication. A P intermedia/P nigrescens-specific PNA probe was significantly more sensitive than culture-dependent diagnostic assays to detect these strict anaerobes. Conclusion Ps aeruginosa and P intermedia become significantly virulent in vitro and in vivo when cell numbers exceed 10(8) CFU/lung.
  Background In idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) the distribution and spatial-temporal progression of fibrotic changes may be influenced by general or locoregional conditions. From this perspective, patients with asymmetrical disease (AIPF) may be unique. Methods This retrospective study included 32 patients (26 men, mean±SD age 69±7&emsp14;years) with AIPF, as defined by an asymmetry ratio (most affected - least affected fibrosis score)/(most affected + least affected fibrosis score) >0.2. The global fibrosis score was the average of the right and left scores. Patients with AIPF were compared with 64 matched controls with symmetrical IPF. Results Patients with AIPF did not differ from controls in global fibrosis score and forced vital capacity, but carbon monoxide transfer factor was less decreased (52±19% vs 43±13%, p=0.009). The rate of gastro-oesophageal reflux and acute exacerbations was significantly higher in patients with AIPF (62.5% vs 31.3%, p=0.006 and 46.9% vs 17.2%, p=0.004, respectively). In patients with AIPF the right side was more likely to be involved (62.5%); the median asymmetry ratio was 0.5 (range 0.24-1). Although the global fibrosis score worsened significantly in all 23 patients with AIPF with serial high-resolution CT scans (p<0.0001), pulmonary fibrosis remained asymmetrical in all except three. During follow-up, 15 patients with AIPF experienced 18 acute exacerbations. The first episode was virtually unilateral, occurring in the most affected lung in 10 patients (66.7%). Survival was similar between patients with AIPF and controls. Conclusion AIPF may be related to locoregional factors including gastro-oesophageal reflux which may be responsible for both disease expansion and the occurrence of acute exacerbations.
  Hypermutable or mutator microorganisms are those that have an increased spontaneous mutation rate as a result of defects in DNA repair or error avoidance systems. Over the last two decades, several studies have provided strong evidence for a relevant role of mutators in the evolution of natural bacterial populations, particularly in the field of infectious diseases. Among them, chronic respiratory infection with Pseudomonas aeruginosa in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients was the first natural environment to reveal the high prevalence and important role of mutators. A remarkable positive selection of mutators during the course of the chronic infection has been reported, mainly as a result of the emergence of DNA mismatch repair system (mutS, mutL or mutU)-deficient mutants, although strains defective in the GO system (mutM, mutY and mutT) have also been observed. High frequencies of mutators have also been noted among other pathogens in the CF setting, particularly Staphylococcus aureus and Haemophilus influenzae. Enhanced antimicrobial resistance development is the most thoroughly studied consequence of mutators in CF and other chronic infections, although recent studies show that mutators may additionally have important effects on the evolution of virulence, genetic adaptation to the airways of CF patients, persistence of colonization, transmissibility, and perhaps lung function decline. Further prospective clinical studies are nevertheless still needed for an in-depth evaluation of the impact of mutators on disease progression and outcome.
  Purpose: To develop low-dose thin-section computed tomographic (CT) protocols for assessment of cystic fibrosis (CF) in pediatric patients and determine the clinical usefulness thereof compared with chest radiography. Materials and Methods: After institutional review board approval and informed consent from patients or guardians were obtained, 14 patients with CF and 11 patients without CF (16 male, nine female; mean age, 12.6 years ± 5.4 [standard deviation]; range, 3.5-25 years) who underwent imaging for clinical reasons underwent low-dose thin-section CT. Sections 1 mm thick (protocol A) were used in 10 patients, and sections 0.5 mm thick (protocol B) were used in 15 patients at six levels at 120 kVp and 30-50 mA. Image quality and diagnostic acceptability were scored qualitatively and quantitatively by two radiologists who also quantified disease severity at thin-section CT and chest radiography. Effective doses were calculated by using a CT dosimetry calculator. Results: Low-dose thin-section CT was performed with mean effective doses of 0.19 mSv ± 0.03 for protocol A and 0.14 mSv ± 0.04 for protocol B (P < .005). Diagnostic acceptability and depiction of bronchovascular structures at lung window settings were graded as almost excellent for both protocols, but protocol B was inferior to protocol A for mediastinal assessment (P < .02). Patients with CF had moderate lung disease with a mean Bhalla score of 9.2 ± 5.3 (range, 0-19), compared with that of patients without CF (1.1 ± 1.4; P < .001). There was excellent correlation between thin-section CT and chest radiography (r = 0.88-0.92; P < .001). Conclusion: Low-dose thin-section CT can be performed at lower effective doses than can standard CT, approaching those of chest radiography. Low-dose thin-section CT could be appropriate for evaluating bronchiectasis in pediatric patients, yielding appropriate information about lung parenchyma and bronchovascular structures. © RSNA, 2010.
  Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is an interstitial lung disease characterized by irreversible scarring. Collagen deposition, myofibroblast expansion, and the development of fibroblastic foci are the hallmark pathological events. The origin and mechanism of recruitment of myofibroblasts, the key cell contributing to these events, is unknown. We hypothesize that the fibrotic lung microenvironment causes differentiation of arriving bone marrow-derived cells into myofibroblasts. Therefore, a method of isolating the effects of fibrotic microenvironment components on various cell types was developed. Electrospun nanofibers were coated with lung extracts from fibrotic or non-fibrotic mice and used to determine effects on bone marrow cells from naïve mice. Varying moduli nanofibers were also employed to determine matrix stiffness effects on these cells. At structured time points, bone marrow cell morphology was recorded and changes in fibrotic gene expression determined by real-time PCR. Cells plated on extracts isolated from fibrotic murine lungs secreted larger amounts of extracellular matrix, adopted a fibroblastic morphology, and exhibited increased myofibroblast gene expression after 8 and 14 days; cells plated on extracts from non-fibrotic lungs did not. Similar results were observed when the nanofiber modulus was increased. This ex vivo system appears to recapitulate the three-dimensional fibrotic lung microenvironment.
  Aims:  To determine the feasibility of formulating and aerosolizing powders containing bacteriophages KS4-M and ΦKZ for lung delivery and treatment of pulmonary Burkholderia cepacia complex and Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections. Methods and Results:  Endotoxin-removed bacteriophages KS4-M and ΦKZ were lyophilized in lactose/lactoferrin 60 : 40 w/w matrix and deagglomerated in a mixer mill (without beads) to formulate respirable powders. The powders were then aerosolized using an Aerolizer(®) capsule inhaler. Mass median aerodynamic diameter (MMAD) of this inhalable aerosol was determined using Andersen cascade impactor at 60 l min(-1) . Measured MMAD for both types of powders was 3·4 μm, and geometric standard deviation was 1·9-2·0. Viability of bacteriophages delivered distal to an idealized mouth-throat replica was determined from bioassays of samples collected on filters placed after the idealized replica. As a percentage of inhaler load, amount of powder delivered distal to the mouth-throat replica, which is a measure of lung delivery, was 33·7 ± 0·3% for KS4-M and 32·7 ± 0·9% for ΦKZ. Titres collected downstream of the mouth throat were (3·4 ± 2·5) × 10(6)  PFU for KS4-M with an Aerolizer capsule load of (9·8 ± 4·8) × 10(6) and (1·9 ± 0·6) × 10(7) for ΦKZ with an Aerolizer capsule load of (6·5 ± 1·9) × 10(7) . Conclusions:  Bacteriophages KS4-M and ΦKZ can be lyophilized without significant loss of viability in a lactose/lactoferrin 60 : 40 w/w matrix. The resulting powders can be aerosolized to deliver viable bacteriophages to the lungs. Significance and Impact of the Study:  Development of lactoferrin-based bacteriophage aerosol powders solidifies the ground for future research on developing novel formulations as an alternative to inhaled antibiotic therapy in patients with cystic fibrosis.
  ABSTRACT Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a devastating disease without proper treatment. Despite intensive research, the exact underlying pathogenesis remains elusive. It is regarded as a continuous injury, resulting in inflammation, infiltration, and proliferation of fibroblasts and extracellular matrix deposition, leading to an irreversible restrictive lung function deterioration and death. In this study the effect of azithromycin, a macrolide antibiotic on bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis was investigated. C57BL/6 mice were intratracheally instilled with bleomycin (0.5 mg/kg) or saline. In the bleomycin group, half of the animals received azithromycin every other day from day 1 on. Bronchoalveolar lavage and histology were performed at days 7 and 35, and pulmonary function tests on day 35. At day 35, fibrotic lesions (spindle cell proliferation/collagen I deposition) were paralleled by a restrictive lung function pattern. Alterations were found in neutrophils and macrophages (innate immunity) and in T<inf>H</inf>2, T<inf>H</inf>17, and Treg cytokines (adaptive immunity). Azithromycin significantly reduced both fibrosis and the restrictive lung function pattern. This study demonstrated a beneficial effect of azithromycin on bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis. A possible mechanism could be a modulation of both innate immunity and adaptive immunity. These findings might suggest a potential role for azithromycin in the treatment of IPF.
  The results of a few studies evaluating the efficacy and safety of nebulized tobramycin solution used in patients with cystic fibrosis have been published to date. Pulmonary deposition of inhaled tobramycin and its lung produced concentrations are rather high (10-25 times greater than the minimum suppressing concentration) and systemic absorption is extremely low. The treatment makes it possible to improve external respiratory function, to lower the colonization of the bronchi with Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and, in many cases, to achieve its eradication. Inhaled tobramycin reduces the sputum level of inflammatory cytokines in patients with cystic fibrosis, which slows down irreversible lung changes. Inhaled antibacterial therapy results in a reduction in the number of exacerbations, the frequency of admissions, and the need for systemic antibiotics.
  BACKGROUND: Nitrite and nitrate are exhaled in droplets of an aerosol during breathing and can be assayed in the exhaled breath condensate (EBC) as markers of nitrossative stress in the airways of patients with asthma, COPD, and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Using HPLC with fluorescence detection, nitrite and nitrate were assayed in EBC of 14 atopic patients with mild-to-moderate stable asthma, 18 atopic asthmatics with exacerbation, 14 COPD patients without exacerbation, 18 patients with exacerbated COPD, 13 patients with active IPF, and in 29 healthy subjects. RESULTS: The geometric mean [exp(mean±SD)] EBC concentrations of nitrite (micromol/l) in patients with asthma [5.1(2.1-12.3)], exacerbation of asthma [5.1(2.8-9.6)], exacerbation of COPD [5.3(3.2-8.7)], and with IPF [5.5(2.9-10.2)] were higher (P<0.05) compared with those of healthy subjects [2.9(1.6-5.3)] and patients with stable COPD [3.0(1.3-6.7)]. Nitrite concentration increased with decreased lung function of patients with asthma (r(s)=-0.31, P<0.02). Presumably owing to the contamination of the EBC sample with nitrate during collection, nitrate levels were highly variable among healthy subjects and higher compared with all groups of patients. CONCLUSION: EBC nitrite is a suitable marker of nitrossative stress in adult patients with lung diseases but cannot differentiate controlled and exacerbated asthma. Further improvements to the methods of EBC collection and sample handling are warranted.
  A 61-year-old man with severe idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis developed subacute, bilateral lung torsion after uneventful double lung transplantation. Unenhanced chest computed tomography demonstrated abnormal orientations of both lung allografts with narrowing of the main and lobar bronchi. Surgical reexploration confirmed clockwise rotation of the left lung allograft and counterclockwise rotation of the right lung allograft around their respective hilar axes, as viewed from the ipsilateral axilla. Our case illustrates the value of computed tomography imaging in identifying abnormal lung orientation and bronchial narrowing, and we discuss the potential mechanism for this unusual postoperative event.
  Notch is an ancient cell signaling system that regulates cell fate specification. This study examined the role of Notch in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and myofibroblast differentiation of cultured RLE-6TN cells, rat alveolar epithelial cells. Activation of Notch, either by ectopic expression of Notch intracellular domain or by coculture of RLE-6TN cells with L-Jagged1 cells, induced the expression of the smooth muscle α-actin (SMA) and other mesenchymal marker genes (collagen I and vimentin) and reduced the expression of the epithelial marker genes (E-cadherin, occludin and zonula occludens-1). Pharmacological inhibition of endogenous Notch signal significantly inhibited transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β)-induced SMA expression. Cell migratory capacity was increased by Notch. Luciferase assays revealed that CArG box and TGF-β-control element (TCE) are required for Notch-induced SMA gene transcription. DNA microarray analysis revealed that members of TGF-β family as well as Jagged1 were induced in RLE-6TN cells by Notch. Western blot analysis showed that Notch induced phosphorylation of Smad3 and TGF-β receptor typeI/ALK5 kinase inhibitor SB431542 markedly reduced Notch-induced SMA expression. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays confirmed the production of TGF-β1 from RLE-6TN cells by Notch. Immunohistochemistry of bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis model and lung specimens from idiopathic interstitial pneumonias patients showed that Notch was strongly expressed in myofibroblasts as identified as SMA-positive cells. These data indicate that Notch induces myofibroblast differentiation through TGF-ß/Smad3 pathway which activates SMA gene transcription in a CArG- and TCE-dependent manner in alveolar epithelial cells. Our data also imply that Notch induces EMT phenotype with an increased migratory behavior in pulmonary fibrosis.
  Rationale: Patients receiving thoracic radiation often develop pulmonary injury and fibrosis. Currently, there are no effective measures to prevent or treat these conditions. Objectives: We tested whether blockade of the chemokine, CCL3, and its receptors, CCR1 and CCR5, can prevent radiation-induced lung inflammation and fibrosis. Methods: C57BL/6J mice received thoracic radiation, and the interaction of CCL3 with CCR1 or CCR5 was blocked using genetic techniques, or by pharmacologic intervention. Lung inflammation was assessed by histochemical staining of lung tissue, and by flow cytometry. Fibrosis was measured by hydroxyproline assays and collagen staining, and lung function was studied by invasive procedures. Results: Irradiated mice lacking CCL3 or its receptor, CCR1, did not develop the lung inflammation, fibrosis and decline in lung function seen in irradiated WT mice. Pharmacologic treatment of WT mice with a small molecule inhibitor of CCR1 also prevented lung inflammation and fibrosis. By contrast, mice lacking CCR5 were not protected from radiation induced injury and fibrosis. Conclusions: The selective interaction of CCL3 with its receptor, CCR1, is critical for radiation-induced lung inflammation and fibrosis, and these conditions can be largely prevented by a small molecule inhibitor of CCR1.
  RATIONALE: The respiratory epithelium has a remarkable capacity to respond to acute injury. In contrast, repeated epithelial injury is often associated with abnormal repair, inflammation and fibrosis. There is increasing evidence that non-ciliated epithelial cells play important roles in the repair of the bronchiolar epithelium following acute injury. Cellular processes underlying the repair and remodeling of the lung following chronic epithelial injury are poorly understood. OBJECTIVE: To identify cell processes mediating epithelial regeneration and remodeling after acute and chronic Clara cell depletion. METHODS: A transgenic mouse model was generated to conditionally express diphtheria toxin A to ablate Clara cells in the adult lung. Epithelial regeneration and peribronchiolar fibrosis were assessed after acute and chronic Clara cell depletion. MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Acute Clara cell ablation caused squamous metaplasia of ciliated cells and induced proliferation of residual progenitor cells. Ciliated cells in the bronchioles and pro-SPC expressing cells in the bronchiolar alveolar duct junctions did not proliferate. Epithelial cell proliferation occurred at multiple sites along the airways and was not selectively associated with regions around neuroepithelial bodies. Chronic Clara cell depletion resulted in ineffective repair and caused peribronchiolar fibrosis. CONCLUSIONS: Co-localization of proliferation and cell type specific markers demonstrate that Clara cells are critical airway progenitor cells. Continuous depletion of Clara cells resulted in persistent squamous metaplasia, lack of normal re-epithelialization and peribronchiolar fibrosis. Induction of proliferation in subepithelial fibroblasts, supports the concept that chronic epithelial depletion caused peribronchiolar fibrosis.
  Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the causal organism of tuberculosis (TB), is one of the oldest and still one of the deadliest pathogens known to man. Approximately 1 in 10 people with primary pulmonary tuberculosis (PTB) present clinically; of untreated cases, approximately 1 in 10 reactivate usually at a time of relative immunodeficiency. The spectrum of radiologic manifestations of PTB can pose a variety of diagnostic and management challenges. PTB infection often leaves long term sequelae of infection, particularly granulomatous nodules, cavitation, and fibrosis; distinguishing dormant disease from reactivation is not always clear-cut. The radiologic presentation of primary PTB infection tends to differ from that of post-primary PTB, but there is significant overlap in the appearances. Primary PTB typically presents with consolidation and regional lymphadenopathy, whereas post-primary PTB more often results in cavitation. The pathology and therefore the radiology of TB infection will be altered based on the efficacy of the immune response and will therefore vary depending on the immune competency. Clinically, in the presence of infection, the main questions are whether M tuberculosis is the infecting organism and, if treated, does the radiology indicate response to treatment. In order to interpret the radiology of TB one needs to be aware of the spectrum of presentation, the expected reaction to treatment, and the myriad of non-pulmonary sites of infection that may prove to be more clinically significant than the pulmonary infection.
  BACKGROUND: The mutation in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene results in CF. The most common mutation, ΔF508-CFTR, is a temperature-sensitive, trafficking mutant with reduced chloride transport and exaggerated immune response. The ΔF508-CFTR is misfolded, ubiquitinated, and prematurely degraded by proteasome mediated- degradation. We recently demonstrated that selective inhibition of proteasomal pathway by the FDA approved drug PS-341 (pyrazylcarbonyl-Phe-Leuboronate, a.k.a. Velcade or bortezomib) ameliorates the inflammatory pathophysiology of CF cells. This proteasomal drug is an extremely potent, stable, reversible and selective inhibitor of chymotryptic threonine protease-activity. The apprehension in considering the proteasome as a therapeutic target is that proteasome inhibitors may affect proteostasis and consecutive processes. The affect on multiple processes can be mitigated by nanoparticle mediated PS-341 lung-delivery resulting in favorable outcome observed in this study. RESULTS: To overcome this challenge, we developed a nano-based approach that uses drug loaded biodegradable nanoparticle (PLGA-PEGPS-341) to provide controlled and sustained drug delivery. The in vitro release kinetics of drug from nanoparticle was quantified by proteasomal activity assay from days 1-7 that showed slow drug release from day 2-7 with maximum inhibition at day 7. For in vivo release kinetics and biodistribution, these drug-loaded nanoparticles were fluorescently labeled, and administered to C57BL6 mice by intranasal route. Whole-body optical imaging of the treated live animals demonstrates efficient delivery of particles to murine lungs, 24 hrs post treatment, followed by biodegradation and release over time, day 1-11. The efficacy of drug release in CF mice (Cftr-/-) lungs was determined by quantifying the changes in proteasomal activity (~2 fold decrease) and ability to rescue the Pseudomonas aeruginosa LPS (Pa-LPS) induced inflammation, which demonstrates the rescue of CF lung disease in murine model. CONCLUSION: We have developed a novel drug delivery system to provide sustained delivery of CF "correctors" and "anti-inflammatories" to the lungs. Moreover, we demonstrate here the therapeutic efficacy of nano-based proteostasis-modulator to rescue Pa-LPS induced CF lung disease.
  BACKGROUND: Pseudomonas aeruginosa is the major respiratory pathogen causing severe lung infections among CF patients, leading to high morbidity and mortality. Once infection is established, early antibiotic treatment is able to postpone the transition to chronic lung infection. In order to optimize the early detection, we compared the sensitivity of microbiological culture and quantitative PCR (qPCR) for the detection of P. aeruginosa in respiratory samples of not chronically infected CF patients. RESULTS: In this national study, we followed CF patients during periods between 1 to 15 months. For a total of 852 samples, 729 (86%) remained P. aeruginosa negative by both culture and qPCR, whereas 89 samples (10%) were positive by both culture and qPCR.Twenty-six samples were negative by culture but positive by qPCR, and 10 samples were positive by culture but remained negative by qPCR. Five of the 26 patients with a culture negative, qPCR positive sample became later P. aeruginosa positive both by culture and qPCR. CONCLUSION: Based on the results of this study, it can be concluded that qPCR may have a predictive value for impending P. aeruginosa infection for only a limited number of patients.
  Exercise performance in individuals with cystic fibrosis has been shown to be related to the extent of pulmonary dysfunction and undernutrition and genetic profile. The aim of this study was to examine these relationships in young children with cystic fibrosis. The participants were 64 children ages 8 to 11 years (M = 9.3, SD = 0.9) with cystic fibrosis and pancreatic insufficiency recruited from 13 different U.S. cystic fibrosis centers. Assigned to one of three groups by deltaF508 status: deltaF508/deltaF508 homozygous, deltaF508/Other heterozygous, and Other/Other, growth, nutritional and pulmonary status, and exercise performance were measured. Differences in exercise performance, pulmonary function, and nutritional status were not observed among the three groups. However, undernutrition and decreased pulmonary function were associated with measures of exercise performance. These results imply no effect of deltaF508 status on overall functional capacity during preadolescence in children with cystic fibrosis. Rather, the extent of pulmonary disease and undernutrition were associated with functional performance.
  Cystic fibrosis is the most frequent and lethal inherited disease, affecting populations of European and Caucasian origin. Pneumothorax is life threatening pulmonary complication of cystic fibrosis. Bilateral pneumothorax is rarely seen and is a predictor of poor prognosis. We report a newborn presenting with bilateral pneumothorax whose diagnosis was cystic fibrosis with N1303K mutation on CFTR gene.
  ABSTRACT BACKGROUND: Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is often associated with elevation in pulmonary artery pressures. Although primary pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) has been associated with primary graft dysfunction (PGD), the role of secondary PAH in mediating PGD risk among IPF patients is incompletely understood. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the relationship between mean pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP) and PGD among patients with IPF. METHODS: We performed a multi-center prospective cohort study of 126 lung transplant procedures performed for IPF between March 2002 and August 2007. The primary outcome was Grade 3 PGD at 72 hours after lung transplant. mPAP was measured as the initial reading following insertion of the right heart catheter during lung transplant. Multivariable logistic regression was used to adjust for confounding variables. RESULTS: The mPAP for those with PGD was 38.5 ± 16.3 mm Hg in PGD patients vs. 29.6 ± 11.5 mm Hg in those without PGD (mean difference, 8.9 mm Hg [95% CI, 3.6, 14.2]; p = 0.001). The increase in odds of PGD associated with each 10 mmHg increase in mPAP was 1.64 (95%CI: 1.18, 2.26; p = 0.003). In multivariable models, this relationship was independent of confounding by other clinical variables, although the use of cardiopulmonary bypass partially attenuated the relationship. CONCLUSIONS: Higher mPAP in IPF patients is associated with the development of PGD.
  The treatment of pulmonary fibrosis continues to pose major difficulties. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), the most prevalent chronic fibrosing lung disease, is a devastating condition that carries a prognosis worse than that of many cancers. Abnormalities in multiple pathways involved in wound healing and inflammation lead to the development of this condition. High doses of corticosteroids are now contraindicated in IPF, although they have a role in other fibrosing lung diseases. More effective treatments are urgently required and a number of novel candidate therapies have been put forward, based on animal and in vitro work. As in other complex disorders, it is likely that combinations of agents, rather than single treatments, will be needed. The principle of combination therapy was recently endorsed by the guidelines of the British Thoracic Society, which make a weak recommendation for a combination of prednisolone, azathioprine and N-acetylcysteine. However, enrolment of patients into trials of new therapies is considered to be 'best current practice' as this offers sufferers with IPF the chance to receive new agents that may be more effective than current treatments. In pulmonary fibrotic disorders other than IPF, anti-inflammatory therapy is broadly appropriate and benefits most patients, but a clear treatment strategy is essential. The art of management is to distinguish accurately between inherently stable fibrotic disease (with treatment not required), progressive predominantly fibrotic disease (with low-dose long-term treatment warranted to retard progression) and the presence of major associated inflammation (justifying initial high-dose treatment).
  Asymptomatic 2 month-old infant referred for evaluation of a hard abdominal mass on the left side. The ultrasound examination showed a solid-cystic tumour above the left kidney. The alpha-fetoprotein level was 2000ng/ml. The meta-iodobenzylguanidine (123-I-MIBG) showed no tumour uptake. At 48h, she showed signs of hypovolemic shock. The chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly with a cardiothoracic ratio of 0.7 and pulmonary congestion. The echocardiogram showed a dilated left ventricle with ejection fraction 35-40%. Anaemia, hypertension, hypervolemia and hyper-secretion of catecholamines were ruled out. The virology and metabolic screens were normal. The highly vascularised retroperitoneal tumour was resected without incident and confirmed the diagnosis of an immature Norris grade 2 teratoma grade. At 3 months the outcome was satisfactory. Teratomas are rare tumours in childhood that generally have a benign course. Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) secondary to, chromaffin cell tumours (phaeochromocytoma, neuroblastoma, ganglioneuroblastoma), leukaemia infiltrates, and treatment with anthracyclines have been described, but there is no case reported in the literature regarding a teratoma with dilated cardiomyopathy. Various cytokines, such as INF-α, IL-1, IL-6 may be secreted by tumour, promoting fibroblast activity in the heart and inducing apoptosis and myocardial fibrosis. Thus, in the case presented resection of the tumour mass responsible for this production, enables the heart to return to normal.
  Obstructive uropathy in sarcoidosis can result from retroperitoneal involvement, retroperitoneal fibrosis (RPF), renal stones, or ureteral involvement. We report acute kidney injury (AKI) from obstructive uropathy because of RPF in a female patient, 2 years following the resolution of pulmonary sarcoidosis. We propose that RPF may occur in sarcoidosis even when a lag of years separates the presentations of the illnesses.
  In this study, we have evaluated the pulmonary toxicity of intratracheally (i.t.) instilled two multi walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) in rats. The lungs of rats were instilled with phosphate buffered saline + 1% of Tween 80 or MWCNT or carbonyl iron or quartz particles at a dose of 0.2, 1, and 5 mg/kg b.w. Following exposure, bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid was collected from the lungs to analyze lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), lipid peroxidation products (MDA; malondialdehyde), and total microprotein (MTP) levels at 24 h, one week, one month, and three months post instillation periods. The lungs of particle exposed rats were also collected at the same intervals to evaluate for histopathology. Exposures of MWCNT and quartz particles to rats produced transient dose dependant increase in BAL fluid LDH, ALP, MDA, and MTP values than control at all post exposure periods. Results of lung histopathology revealed that exposure of MWCNT produced a dose dependant focal peribronchiolar lymphoid aggregates, foamy alveolar macrophage accumulation, lymphoplasmocytic infiltration, fibrosis and diffuse alveolar damage. In conclusion, instillation of MWCNT produced a greater pulmonary toxicity in rats and was comparable with that of quartz. © 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Environ Toxicol, 2010.
  Background: Chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) can lead to irreversible pulmonary fibrosis. A good animal model is essential to elucidate the mechanisms of this disease. We previously reported that a Th2 predominance may play an important role in the fibrogenesis in chronic HP patients. A study was undertaken to evaluate whether Th2-biased immune responses were crucial during the processes of lung fibrosis in a murine model of chronic HP. Methods: Instillation of pigeon dropping extracts (PDE) was conducted 3 days a week for 6 or 12 weeks in C57BL/6, BALB/c and A/J mice to establish models of chronic HP. We evaluated the histopathological features, immunohistochemistry, collagen content, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) profiles and Th1/Th2 cytokines in BALF or lung tissue with RT-PCR and ELISA. Results: Thickening of the alveolar walls and structural alterations were observed only in the A/J mice after 12 weeks of exposure to PDE. The fibrosis scores were significantly increased in 12-week A/J mice compared to those in the other strains. Immunohistochemistry evaluation showed that PDE was engulfed by alveolar macrophages that were incorporated into the alveolar septa of 12-week A/J mice. Interleukin (IL)-4 mRNA increased significantly in 6- and 12-week A/J mice. IL-13 mRNA showed a significant increase in 12-week A/J mice compared with 6-week A/J mice. TGF-β1 mRNA at 12 weeks was significantly increased in A/J mice compared with the other groups. Conclusion: Th2-biased genetic backgrounds may play an important role in fibrosing processes in the present chronic HP model.
  Monitoring Editor: Yu-Li Wang Ablation of nonmuscle myosin (NM) II-A or NM II-B results in mouse embryonic lethality. Here we report the results of ablating NM II-C as well as NM II-C/II-B together in mice. NM II-C ablated mice survive to adulthood and show no obvious defects compared with wild-type littermates. However, ablation of NM II-C in mice expressing only 12% of wild-type amounts of NM II-B results in a marked increase in cardiac myocyte hypertrophy compared with the NM II-B hypomorphic mice alone. In addition, these hearts develop interstitial fibrosis associated with diffuse N-cadherin and β-catenin localization at the intercalated discs, where both NM II-B and II-C are normally concentrated. When both NM II-C and II-B are ablated the B(-)C(-)/B(-)C(-) cardiac myocytes show major defects in karyokinesis. Over 90% of B(-)C(-)/B(-)C(-) myocytes demonstrate defects in chromatid segregation and mitotic spindle formation accompanied by increased stability of microtubules and abnormal formation of multiple centrosomes. This requirement for NM II in karyokinesis is further demonstrated in the HL-1 cell line derived from mouse atrial myocytes, using siRNA knockdown of NM II or treatment with the myosin inhibitor blebbistatin. Our study shows that NM II is involved in regulating cardiac myocyte karyokinesis by affecting microtubule dynamics.
  RATIONALE: The St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) is often applied to assess health-related quality of life in patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). Some SGRQ items will inevitably have weaker measurement properties than others when applied to this population. This study was conducted to develop an IPF-specific version of the SGRQ. METHODS: Data from a recently completed trial that enrolled subjects with IPF (n=158) who completed the SGRQ and other measures were analysed at baseline and 6 months. There were four phases to the study: (1) removing items with missing responses and using Rasch analysis on retained items to identify fit and refine item response categories; (2) development of a new scoring scheme; (3) testing agreement between original and revised versions and testing construct validity of the revised SGRQ; and (4) rewording to finalise the IPF-specific version (SGRQ-I). RESULTS: Items were removed due to missing responses (6 items) and misfit to the Rasch model (10 items); 34 items from the original 50 were retained. For certain items, disordered response thresholds were identified and corrected by collapsing response categories. A scoring algorithm was developed to place SGRQ-I scores on a scale with SGRQ scores. For any given outcome measure (eg, forced vital capacity (% predicted) and lung carbon monoxide transfer factor (% predicted), 6-min walk distance and patient-reported questionnaires), Pearson correlations were similar between pairs that included original SGRQ scores and corresponding pairs that included SGRQ-I scores. Internal reliability (Cronbach α) for each SGRQ-I component was comparable to the original SGRQ (Symptoms 0.62; Activities 0.80; Impacts 0.85). CONCLUSIONS: The SGRQ-I contains items from the original SGRQ that are the most reliable for measuring health-related quality of life in patients with IPF.
  ABSTRACT Human and animal studies of acute lung injury (ALI) have shown that matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play an important role in disease pathogenesis, but despite being detected during ALI, the function of the collagenase MMP-13 in ALI is unknown. To evaluate this role of MMP-13, mice deficient in MMP-13 (KO) were examined after hyperoxic lung injury, and compared to wild-type (WT) mice. There was no survival difference between KO and WT mice. There was also no difference in fibrosis between WT and KO mice, as determined by hydroxyproline content and collagen expression by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Within the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), the KO mice exhibited a significant increase in inflammatory cells, when compared to the WT mice (5.51 × 10(5) versus 2.35 × 10(5) cells/mL; P = .001). Increased levels of the chemokine monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (MCP-1) were observed in the lungs of the KO mice, confirmed via immunohistochemistry. In a subsequent in vitro experiment, MMP-13 was shown to cleave MCP-1. In ALI in the MMP-13 KO mice, MCP-1 could therefore remain active and potentially attract macrophages to the BAL. This study suggests a direct role for MMP-13 in modifying the inflammatory response in the lung after ALI.
  BACKGROUND: The optimal dose and efficacy of ¹³¹I treatment of children and adolescents with well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma (WDTC) and pulmonary metastases are not well established. A therapeutic challenge is to achieve the maximum benefit of ¹³¹I to decrease disease-related morbidity and obtain disease-free survival while avoiding the potential complications of ¹³¹I therapy. SUMMARY: We systematically reviewed the published literature on children and adolescents with WDTC and pulmonary metastases treated with ¹³¹I to examine outcomes after ¹³¹I administration and the risks and benefits of therapy. After reviewing 14 published articles, 9 articles met our inclusion criteria encompassing 112 pediatric and adolescent patients with WDTC and pulmonary metastases 21 years of age or younger at diagnosis spanning a follow-up period of 0.6–45 years. ¹³¹I therapy after surgery and thyrotropin suppression resulted in complete, partial, and no disease response in 47.32%, 38.39%, and 14.29% of patients, respectively. Five studies provided data on disease response in relation to ¹³¹I dose. In general, nonresponders received the highest ¹³¹I doses and complete responders received a higher dose than partial responders. The disease-specific mortality rate was 2.68%. Survival was 97.32%. A second primary malignancy occurred in one patient. One out of 11 patients studied experienced radiation fibrosis. CONCLUSIONS: This review confirms that the majority of pediatric and adolescent patients with WDTC and pulmonary metastases treated with ¹³¹I do not achieve complete response to therapy, yet disease-specific morbidity and mortality appear to remain low. It is therefore prudent to use caution in the repeated administration of ¹³¹I to such patients to ensure that adverse effects of therapy do not cause more harm than good in a disease that has an overall favorable natural course. Long-term prospective studies are needed to analyze disease-specific morbidity and mortality, recurrence rate, dose-specific response, and dose-related adverse effects of ¹³¹I in this patient population.
  Background/Objectives:The hallmark of cystic fibrosis (CF) is chronic lung inflammation. The severity of lung disease is closely correlated with immunoglobulin G (IgG) levels. Beyond its contribution to the bone health, the importance of vitamin D has not been fully recognized owing to the lack of human studies providing evidence of its benefit. In the context of the recently described immunomodulatory functions of vitamin D, we aimed to assess the relationship between vitamin D and IgG levels.Subjects/Methods:Eight hundred and ninety-six CF patients were included (0.53-65.9 years) from seven centers in Denmark, Norway and Sweden. Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25OHD) and total IgG were measured, spirometry was carried out and vitamin D intake data were gathered using a 7-day dietary food record. Multiple linear regression analyses were performed for IgG and forced expiratory volume in 1λs (FEV1) as dependent variables, and serum 25OHD, daily food and supplemented vitamin D sources of intake as independent variables. The model was controlled for age, gender, genotype, CF-related diabetes, season, infection/colonization status, long-term oral corticosteroid treatment, long-term treatment with macrolide antibiotics, pancreatic insufficient phenotype and body mass index z-score.Results:Serum total IgG levels were negatively associated with serum 25OHD (adjusted R (2)=0.376; beta=-0.02; P<0.001), supplemented vitamin D intake per kg bodyweight (adjusted R (2)=0.375; beta=-0.82; P<0.001) and total vitamin D intake per kg bodyweight (adjusted R (2)=0.398; beta=-0.60; P=0.002). Serum 25OHD was positively associated with FEV1 (adjusted R (2)=0.308; beta=0.0007; P=0.025).Conclusions:Increasing vitamin D intake may positively modulate inflammation in CF. This study supports the proposed role of vitamin D in the immune system during infection and substantiates prospective studies.European Journal of Clinical Nutrition advance online publication, 22 September 2010; doi:10.1038/ejcn.2010.194.
  Pulmonary fibrosis is a common feature of a large group of lung diseases. The molecular mechanisms underlying pulmonary fibrosis and the key macromolecules involved are not fully understood yet. In an effort to better understand aspects of pulmonary fibrosis, the established bleomycin injection model in mice was used and the focus of the present study was on integrin-linked kinase (ILK) expression. ILK is an intracellular protein involved in the regulation of integrin-mediated processes. In fibrosis, ILK has been examined in the kidney and in the liver where it mediates epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and hepatic stellate cell activation, respectively. However, information on ILK's involvement in lung fibrosis is missing. In order to examine ILK's role in pulmonary fibrosis, we used both an in vivo and an in vitro approach. In vivo, the bleomycin model was used in order to examine ILK's expression and localization in the fibrotic lung. In vitro, transforming growth factor-β1 was used to induce fibrotic characteristics and EMT in alveolar epithelial cells. ILK's role in alveolar EMT was studied by siRNA. Our results demonstrate that in the animal model used, ILK exhibits a decrease in expression at early stages of the fibrotic process and that a specific subset of fibroblasts is expressing ILK. The in vitro experiments suggested that ILK is not directly involved in E-cadherin downregulation and initiation of EMT (as is the case in renal fibrosis) but is involved in upregulation of vimentin. These results suggest that ILK is involved in lung fibrosis in a tissue-specific manner and raise the possibility to use it as a specific therapeutic target for lung fibrosis in the future.
  The Gram-negative bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a common cause of chronic airway infections in individuals with the heritable disease cystic fibrosis (CF). After prolonged colonization of the CF lung, P. aeruginosa becomes highly resistant to host clearance and antibiotic treatment; therefore, understanding how this bacterium evolves during chronic infection is important for identifying beneficial adaptations that could be targeted therapeutically. To identify potential adaptive traits of P. aeruginosa during chronic infection, we carried out global transcriptomic profiling of chronological clonal isolates obtained from 3 individuals with CF. Isolates were collected sequentially over periods ranging from 3 months to 8 years, representing up to 39,000 in vivo generations. We identified 24 genes that were commonly regulated by all 3 P. aeruginosa lineages, including several genes encoding traits previously shown to be important for in vivo growth. Our results reveal that parallel evolution occurs in the CF lung and that at least a proportion of the traits identified are beneficial for P. aeruginosa chronic colonization of the CF lung.
  Previous studies showed that apoptotic epithelial cells were involved in the pathogenesis of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF)/usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP); however, little is known about apoptosis in chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP). This study was performed to examine whether apoptosis has a role in chronic HP. We performed immunohistochemical studies for p53, p21, Fas, Fas ligand, and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate-biotin nick-end labeling methods on surgical lung specimens. The expression of Fas and Fas ligand was up-regulated in UIP-like lesions compared with nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP)-like lesions. The expression of p53 and p21 on epithelial cells increased significantly in UIP-like lesions compared with fibrotic NSIP-like lesions and in fibrotic NSIP-like lesions compared with normal lung tissues. These results confirm that apoptotic epithelial cells are present in chronic HP as seen in IPF. Augmented epithelial apoptosis may contribute much more to UIP-like lesions than to NSIP-like lesions in chronic HP.
  Inflammation-induced pulmonary fibrosis (PF) leads to irreversible loss of lung function and is a predictor of mortality in numerous lung diseases. Why some subjects with lung inflammation but not others develop PF is unclear. In a mouse model of hypersensitivity pneumonitis that progresses to lung fibrosis upon repeated exposure to the ubiquitous microorganism Bacillus subtilis, γδ T cells expand in the lung and inhibit collagen deposition. We show that a subset of these γδ cells represents the predominant source of the Th17 cytokine IL-22 in this model. Preventing expression of IL-22, either by mutating the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) or inhibiting AhR signaling, accelerated lung fibrosis. Direct blockade of IL-22 also enhanced collagen deposition in the lung, whereas administration of recombinant IL-22 inhibited lung fibrosis. Moreover, the presence of protective γδ T cells and IL-22 diminished recruitment of CD4(+) T cells to lung. These data reveal a protective pathway that involves the inhibition of αβ T cells by regulatory IL-22-secreting γδ T cells.
  Churg A, Wright J L & Tazelaar H D (2010) Histopathology Acute exacerbations of fibrotic interstitial lung disease An acute exacerbation is the development of acute lung injury, usually resulting in acute respiratory distress syndrome, in a patient with a pre-existing fibrosing interstitial pneumonia. By definition, acute exacerbations are not caused by infection, heart failure, aspiration or drug reaction. Most patients with acute exacerbations have underlying usual interstitial pneumonia, either idiopathic or in association with a connective tissue disease, but the same process has been reported in patients with fibrotic non-specific interstitial pneumonia, fibrotic hypersensitivity pneumonitis, desquamative interstitial pneumonia and asbestosis. Occasionally an acute exacerbation is the initial manifestation of underlying interstitial lung disease. On biopsy, acute exacerbations appear as diffuse alveolar damage or bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia (BOOP) superimposed upon the fibrosing interstitial pneumonia. Biopsies may be extremely confusing, because the acute injury pattern can completely obscure the underlying disease; a useful clue is that diffuse alveolar damage and organizing pneumonia should not be associated with old dense fibrosis and peripheral honeycomb change. Consultation with radiology can also be extremely helpful, because the fibrosing disease may be evident on old or concurrent computed tomography scans. The aetiology of acute exacerbations is unknown, and the prognosis is poor; however, some patients survive with high-dose steroid therapy.
  Tazelaar H D, Wright J L & Churg A (2010) Histopathology Desquamative interstitial pneumonia Desquamative interstitial pneumonia (DIP) is one of the rarest of the idiopathic interstitial pneumonias. It is characterized by the accumulation of macrophages in large numbers in the alveolar spaces associated with interstitial inflammation and/or fibrosis. The macrophages frequently contain light brown pigment, and because of their association with smoking have been called 'smoker's macrophages'. Lymphoid nodules are common, as is a sparse but distinct eosinophil infiltrate. Most cases of DIP are caused by cigarette smoking, but drugs and other inhaled agents, including marijuana smoke, can also produce the same disease. Although respiratory bronchiolitis-interstitial lung disease (RB-ILD) is a closely related process, there are prognostic reasons for continuing to separate it from DIP when possible. The proposed relationship of DIP to fibrotic non-specific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP) remains uncertain. The prognosis of DIP appears to be significantly better than that of fibrotic NSIP, so while there can be morphological overlap between the two, merging them into one disease may hide important prognostic information. Although the majority of DIP patients improve on treatment, some patients develop progressive irreversible fibrosis.
  Wright J L, Tazelaar H D & Churg A (2010) Histopathology Fibrosis with emphysema The concept of fibrosis with emphysema is confused by the existence of two very different clinical/pathological scenarios: first, cases in which a diffuse fibrosing interstitial pneumonia, most commonly usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP), occurs in a patient with emphysema. This combination is largely of clinical interest because of its effects on pulmonary function and pulmonary hypertension, but can produce unusual appearances in surgical lung biopsies when the fibrotic areas are wrapped around emphysematous spaces. However, the underlying morphology of emphysema and UIP or other interstitial lung disease remains unchanged. Radiological consultation is often helpful to show that the patient has both lesions; secondly, cases in which there is localized fibrosis that is part of emphysema, or related to respiratory bronchiolitis, or both. These lesions have been called 'respiratory bronchiolitis' (RB), 'respiratory bronchiolitis-interstitial lung disease' (RB-ILD), 'airspace enlargement with fibrosis', 'RB-ILD with fibrosis' and 'clinically occult interstitial fibrosis in smokers', but are probably all the same entity. Such changes are associated only rarely with the physiological or radiological features of an interstitial lung disease. Care should be taken when describing these lesions in biopsies so as not to give the impression that a diffuse interstitial lung disease is present.
  New regulations on the protection and rights of workers occupationally exposed to asbestos were introduced in Croatia in 2007 and 2008. They have been harmonised with the European Union (EU) and International Labour Organization (ILO) regulations, and make a step forward in safety at work, health protection, social rights, and pension schemes for Croatian workers occupationally exposed to asbestos. The 2007 Croatian regulation on the protection of workers from the risks related to exposure to asbestos at work defines and describes activities in which workers can be occupationally exposed to asbestos, defines the threshold value of asbestos in the air at work, defines valid methods for measurement of asbestos concentrations in the air, and establishes measures to reduce asbestos exposure at work or protect the exposed workers. Croatian law regulating obligatory health surveillance of workers occupationally exposed to asbestos from year 2007 defines activities and competent authorities to implement health surveillance of workers occupationally exposed to asbestos and to diagnose occupational diseases related to asbestos. This law also defines "occupational exposure to asbestos", and "occupational asbestos-related diseases", including asbestosis (pulmonary asbestos-related fibrosis), pleural asbestos-related disorders (plaques, pleural thickening, and benign effusion), lung and bronchial cancer, and malignant mesothelioma of serous membranes. These regulations have been harmonised with ILO, Directive 2003/18/EC amending Council Directive 83/477/EEC on the protection of workers from the risks related to exposure to asbestos at work, and with the Commission Recommendation 2003/670/EC concerning the European schedule of occupational diseases. The 2008 Croatian regulation on conditions of health surveillance, diagnostic procedures and criteria for confirmation of occupational asbestos-related diseases "defines the terms and the content of medical examination of workers exposed to asbestos, and criteria for the confirmation of occupational asbestos-related diseases which are harmonised with the Helsinki criteria acknowledged by ILO and EU, particularly concerning the level and length of exposure. Croatian law on compensation of workers occupationally exposed to asbestos from 2007 regulates compensation claims for workers with occupational asbestos-related disease, authorities competent to process these claims, and funds and coefficients for compensation payments. Accordingly, Croatia is responsible for compensation claims payment for workers with occupational asbestos-related disease. The 2007 law on conditions for entitlement to full pension for workers exposed to asbestos at work defines the conditions for fulfilling criteria for retirement pension for workers exposed to asbestos at work.
  Impairment of respiratory function is one of the most sensitive indicators used in the evaluation of the effects of air pollution on human health. We compared predicted values of flow-volume curve according to Knudson and the spirometry results in 81 healthy children; 40 girls and 41 boy, aged (10.69 +/- 2.24) years. We also measured the transfer factor of the lungs for carbon monoxide (TLCO) using the single-breath method and compared the results with reference values by Cotes. Patients were selected randomly among pre-school and elementary school children from the Split area, who were residentially exposed to asbestos. Children with atopic diseases, family history of atopy, history of severe respiratory diseases, and history of smoking were excluded from study. We found a statistically significant difference in FVC (p < 0.0001) from normal values according to Knudson, but when expressed in the percentage of the Knudson values, this difference was not significant (p > 0.05). No statistically significant difference was found for FEV1, FEF75, FEF50, FEF25, and FEV1/FVC. TLCO reached (107.37 +/- 20.50)% of normal values according to Cotes, and was not significantly different. At this point, it is hard to predict the consequences of exposure to low levels of asbestos in childhood, because it takes a long time for complications such as neoplasms, pulmonary fibrosis, or respiratory insufficiency to develop.
  Asbestos is a generic name for a group of silicate minerals. The most common are chrysotile, crocidolite, amosite, tremolite and anthophyllite. Exposure to asbestos may cause asbestos-related non-malignant diseases of the lung and pleura, including asbestosis, pleural plaques, diffuse pleural fibrosis, small airway disease, and malignant diseases such as lung cancer and malignant mesothelioma. Inhaled asbestos fibres deposit in the distal regions of the respiratory system where they interact with epithelial cells and alveolar macrophages, and trigger active immunological response which leads to a slowly progressing lung fibrosis. Asbestos may affect immunocompetent cells and induce malignant transformation of mesothelial cells. It is still not clear whether asbestos causes mesothelioma directly or indirectly. There is a general opinion that malignant mesothelioma is a complex tumour that results from the accumulation of multiple genetic alterations over many years. There is no specific antibody for malignant mesothelioma as yet which could act as a single diagnostic tool. Recent studies have demonstrated that asbestos acts on peripheral T cells as superantigen and that in malignant mesothelioma patients there is an overexpression of the Bcl-2 gene on peripheral CD4+ T cells. These findings contribute to better understanding of biological effects of asbestos in respect to the duration and intensity of exposure.
  Studies of matrix metaloproteinases in patients with occupational bronchopulmonary diseases and in individuals exposed to asbestos dust revealed hyperactivated protease system--lower level of MMP-1 proenzyme and increased production of TIMP-1 (metaloproteinases inhibitor)--in all the examinees groups. Patients with pneumoconiosis and occupational dust bronchitis demonstrated increased neutrophilic elastase that is activator of metaloproteinases inducing sclerotic changes and pulmonary fibrosis.
  RATIONALE: In aging HIV-infected populations, comorbid diseases are important determinants of morbidity and mortality. Pulmonary diseases have not been systematically assessed in the combination antiretroviral therapy (ART) era. OBJECTIVES: Determine the incidence of pulmonary diseases in HIV-infected compared to uninfected persons. METHODS: We analyzed data from the Veterans Aging Cohort Study Virtual Cohort, consisting of 33,420 HIV-infected and 66,840 age, gender, race/ethnicity and site-matched HIV-uninfected Veterans. Using Poisson regression, incidence rates and adjusted incidence rate ratios (IRR) were calculated to determine the association of HIV with pulmonary disease. The Virtual Cohort was merged with the 1999 Veterans Large Health Survey to adjust for self-reported smoking in a nested sample (14%). MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Incident COPD, lung cancer, pulmonary hypertension, and pulmonary fibrosis, as well as pulmonary infections, were significantly more likely among HIV-infected compared to HIV-uninfected patients in adjusted analyses, although rates of asthma did not differ by HIV status. Bacterial pneumonia and COPD were the two most common incident pulmonary diseases, whereas opportunistic pneumonias were less common. Absolute rates of most pulmonary diseases increased with age, although the relative differences between those with and without HIV infection were greatest in younger persons. COPD and asthma, as well as pulmonary infections, were less likely in those with lower HIV RNA levels and use of ART at baseline. CONCLUSIONS: Pulmonary diseases among HIV-infected patients receiving care within the Veterans Affairs Healthcare System in the combination ART era reflect a substantial burden of non-AIDS defining and chronic conditions, many of which are associated with aging.
  A 62-year-old woman with a past history of chronic hepatitis C virus infection presented an atypical predominantly painful polymyositis following a flu-like syndrome, persisting despite the withdrawal of PEG-interferon alpha-2b therapy. Clinical assessment, then immunological, electrophysiological and iconographic investigations including myositis antibodies, electromyography, pulmonary functions assessment and thoracic CT-scan found respectively "mechanic hands", arthralgia, presence of antisynthetase anti-PL7 antibody, typical myographic features of hip and shoulder girdles involvement, pulmonary fibrosis and restrictive syndrome features. A deltoid muscle biopsy revealed an unclassified myositis getting closer to anti-J0-1 and connective tissue disease associated myositis featuring: some components of polymyositis, dermatomyositis, and the following peculiar pathological aspects: noncaseous granulomatous infiltrate, endomysial microangiopathy and vascular and sarcolemic deposition of complement membrane attack complex. The diagnosis of interferon induced anti-PL7 antisynthetase syndrome with microangiopathic and granulomatous overlap myositis was retained. A treatment associating intravenous immunoglobulin and moderate tapered oral corticosteroids allowed a complete long-term resolution of myositis and a clear improvement of pulmonary involvement. This case points out the wide range of interferon alpha-associated disorders and call for a precise and detailed immunopathological analysis of myositis, instead of the usual vague classification as idiopathic polymyositis or dermatomyositis about antisynthetase syndrome.
  Fibrosis is a severe and progressive sequel of many pulmonary diseases, has no effective therapy at present and, consequently, represents a serious health problem. In Latin America, chronic pulmonary paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM) is one of the most important, prevalent and systemic fungal diseases that allows the development of lung fibrosis, with the additional disadvantage that this sequel may appear even after an apparently successful course of antifungal therapy. In this study, was propose the pentoxifylline as complementary treatment in the pulmonary PCM due to its immunomodulatory and anti-fibrotic properties demonstrated in vitro and in vivo in liver, skin and lung. Our objective was to investigate the possible beneficial effects that a combined antifungal (Itraconazole) and immunomodulatory (Pentoxifylline) therapy would have in the development of fibrosis in a model of experimental chronic pulmonary PCM in an attempt to simulate the naturally occurring events in human patients. Two different times post-infection (PI) were chosen for starting therapy, an "early time" (4 weeks PI) when fibrosis was still absent and a "late time" (8 weeks PI) when the fibrotic process had started. Infected mice received the treatments via gavage and were sacrificed during or upon termination of treatment; their lungs were then removed and processed for immunological and histopathologic studies in order to assess severity of fibrosis. When pulmonary paracoccidioidomycosis had evolved and reached an advanced stage of disease before treatment began (as normally occurs in many human patients when first diagnosed), the combined therapy (itraconazole plus pentoxifylline) resulted in a significantly more rapid reduction of granulomatous inflammation and pulmonary fibrosis, when compared with the results of classical antifungal therapy using itraconazole alone.
  There are no European Guidelines on issues specifically related to travel for people with cystic fibrosis (CF). The contributors to these recommendations included 30 members of the ECORN-CF project. The document is endorsed by the European Cystic Fibrosis Society and sponsored by the Executive Agency of Health and Consumers of the European Union and the Christiane Herzog Foundation. The main goal of this paper is to provide patient-oriented advice that complements medical aspects by offering practical suggestions for all aspects involved in planning and taking a trip. The report consists of three main sections, preparation for travel, important considerations during travel and at the destination, and issues specific to immunocompromised travellers. People with CF should be encouraged to consult with their CF centre prior to travel to another country. The CF centre can advise on the necessary preparation for travel, the need for vaccinations, essential medications that should be brought on the trip and also provide information relating to CF care in the region and plan of action in case of an emergency.
  CONTEXT: Most patients with advanced cystic fibrosis (CF) die from respiratory failure and experience distressing symptoms as lung disease progresses. Little has been reported about symptom management and the continuation of disease-specific treatments near the end of life for patients with CF. OBJECTIVE: We aimed to describe symptom prevalence, symptom management, and frequency of use of disease-specific treatments for patients dying from complications of CF. METHODS: We conducted semistructured interviews about end-of-life care in CF with bereaved family caregivers and asked questions about symptoms and treatments. RESULTS: Twenty-seven caregivers answered questions about symptoms and treatments. Caregivers reported that distressing symptoms were common during the last week of life, including dyspnea (100%), fatigue (96%), anorexia (85%), anxiety (74%), pain (67%), and cough (56%). Most caregivers felt that symptom control was "somewhat good." Many reported that medical providers "did the best they could" to manage symptoms but four (15%) recalled no physician inquiry about symptoms. Caregivers expressed beliefs that symptoms could not be controlled and described concerns about side effects and potential for hastening death with the use of opioids and anxiolytics. Patients received numerous disease-specific treatments, and caregivers described many of them as uncomfortable but necessary. CONCLUSIONS: Distressing symptoms are common in dying CF patients, and disease-specific treatments also cause discomfort. Many family caregivers have low expectations for symptom control. This exploratory research can be used to inform clinical interventions to improve symptom management for patients with advanced CF.
  Silica and asbestos cause pneumoconioses known as silicosis and asbestosis, respectively, that are each characterized by progressive pulmonary fibrosis. While local effects of inhaled silica particles alter the function of alveolar macrophages and sequential cellular and molecular biological events, general systemic immunological effects may also evolve. One well-known health outcome associated with silica exposure/silicosis is an increase in the incidence of autoimmune disorders. In addition, while exposure to silica-in the crystalline form-has also been seen to be associated with the development of lung cancers, it remains unclear as to whether or not silicosis is a necessary condition for the elevation of silica-associated lung cancer risks. Since asbestos is a mineral silicate, it would be expected to also possess generalized immunotoxicological effects similar to those associated with silica particles. However, asbestos-exposed patients are far better known than silicotic patients for development of malignant diseases such as lung cancer and mesothelioma, and less so for the development of autoimmune disorders. With both asbestos and crystalline silica, one important dysregulatory outcome that needs to be considered is an alteration in tumor immunity that allows for silica- or asbestos- (or asbestos-associated agent)-induced tumors to survive and thrive in situ. In this review, the immunotoxicological effects of both silica and asbestos are presented and contrasted in terms of their abilities to induce immune system dysregulation that then are manifest by the onset of autoimmunity or by alterations in host-tumor immunity.
  INTRODUCTION: Asbestos is banned in most Western countries but related malignancies are still of clinical concern because of their long latencies. This review identifies and addresses some controversial occupational and clinical aspects of asbestos-related malignancies. METHODS: Papers published in English from 1980 to 2009 were retrieved from PubMed. A total of 307 original articles were identified and 159 were included. ASSESSMENT OF EXPOSURE: The retrospective assessment of exposure is usually performed by using questionnaires and job exposure matrices and by careful collection of medical history. In this way crucial information about manufacturing processes and specific jobs can be obtained. In addition, fibers and asbestos bodies are counted in lung tissue, broncho-alveolar lavage, and sputum, but different techniques and interlaboratory variability hamper the interpretation of reported measurements. SCREENING FOR MALIGNANCIES: The effectiveness of low-dose chest CT screening in exposed workers is debatable. Several biomarkers have also been considered to screen individuals at risk for lung cancer and mesothelioma but reliable signatures are still missing. ATTRIBUTION OF LUNG CANCER: Exposures correlating with lung cancer are high and in the same range where asbestosis occurs. However, the unresolved question is whether the presence of fibrosis is a requirement for the attribution of lung cancer to asbestos. The etiology of lung cancer is difficult to define in cases of low-level asbestos exposure and concurrent smoking habits. MESOTHELIOMA: The diagnosis of malignant mesothelioma may also be difficult, because of procedures in sampling, fixation, and processing, and uses of immunohistochemical probes. CONCLUSIONS: Assessment of exposure is crucial and requires accurate medical and occupational histories. Quantitative analysis of asbestos body burden is better performed in digested lung tissues by counting asbestos bodies by light microscopy and/or uncoated fibers by transmission electron microscopy. The benefits of screenings for asbestos-related malignancies are equivocal. The attribution of lung cancer to asbestos exposure is difficult in a clinical setting because of the need to assess asbestos body burden and the fact that virtually all these patients are also tobacco smokers or former smokers. Given the premise that asbestosis is necessary to causally link lung cancer to asbestos, it follows that the assessment of both lung fibrosis and asbestos body burden is necessary.
  A 70-year-old male smoker, with a three-month status of post-balloon angioplasty for ischaemic heart disease, presented with a one-week history of fever, haemoptysis and chest discomfort on coughing. The patient did not report any loss of weight or appetite. On examination, he was febrile. Pulmonary function tests revealed obstructive airway disease. High resolution computed tomography of the lungs revealed fibrosis with bronchiectasis in both the upper lobes, and a spiculating subpleural mass in the posterior aspect of the right lung apex. Subsequent bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) culture yielded the Scopulariopsis species. Our patient was treated with a four-week course of amphotericin B, followed by itraconazole. At the 24-month follow-up, the patient was asymptomatic. Subsequent BAL cultures revealed no fungal growths, and radiological studies showed a regression in the lesion.
  Significant survival heterogeneity exists in cystic fibrosis (CF). Our aim was to determine whether residual function of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) is present in long-term survivors with severe mutations. Nasal potential difference (PD) and sweat chloride were measured in 34 long-term survivors (aged ≥40 years) - compared to young patients (18-23 years) with severe (n=30) and mild (n=31) lung disease. Baseline PD was not significantly different across the three groups (long-term survivors, -42.8(range -71.0 to -20.5)mV; young/mild, -40.5(-58.8 to -19.5); young/severe,-46.3(-74.0 to -20.0)). Response to amiloride (ΔAmil) was significantly different across the three groups (p=0.01); long-term survivors had values (27.8 (8.5-46)mV) which were not different to either young group but the young/severe group had significantly higher values (29.5 (11-47)mV) than those in the young/mild group (22.0 (7-39)mV; p<0.01). Baseline PD and ΔAmil were associated with FEV1 (co-efficient -0.13 (95% CI -0.23, -0.03; p=0.009) and -0.12 (95% CI (-0.20, -0.04; p=0.003), respectively). Sweat chloride was lowest (p<0.05) in the young/severe group (93.5 (74-111)mmol·l(-1) vs. 98.8 (76.5-116.0; long-term survivors) and 99.5 (80.0-113.5; young/mild)). ΔAmil is associated with FEV1 but our findings indicate that long-term survival cannot be explained by residual CFTR function when measurements are taken in later life.
  The objective of this study was to determine whether genetic polymorphisms in enzymes that metabolize oxidative agents modify the individual susceptibility to develop asbestos and smoking related pleuropulmonary changes. Nine polymorphisms of six genes (EPHX1, GSTM1, GSTM3, GSTP1, GSTT1, and NAT2) were genotyped from 1008 Finnish asbestos-exposed workers. The genotype data was compared to signs of lung fibrosis and pleural thickenings, as well as with total lung capacity (TLC), single breath diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DL,CO), and specific diffusing capacity (DL,CO/VA). The GSTT1 deletion polymorphism was associated with fibrotic changes (p=0.003), DL,CO (p=0.02), and DL,CO/VA (p=0.002), and the GSTM1 deletion polymorphism with the greatest thickness of pleural plaques (p=0.009). In further analysis, the GSTT1 null genotype was found to pose over three-fold risk for severe fibrotic changes (OR 3.12, 95% CI 1.51-6.43) and around 2-fold risks for decreased DL,CO (OR 1.77, 95% CI 1.06-2.95) and DL,CO/VA (OR 2.37, 95% CI 1.33-4.23). In addition, the GSTM1 null genotype showed an elevated risk (OR 1.36 95% CI 1.03-1.80) for thicker pleural plaques. Our data suggests that inherited detoxification capacity may affect the development and severity of asbestos and smoking related non-malignant pulmonary changes.
  Mast cells play an essential role in diverse physiological and pathological processes, such as atherosclerosis, malignancy, asthma, pulmonary fibrosis and arthritis, directly interact with bacteria, and appear to play a vital role in host defense against pathogens. Mast cells could be recruited in the inflammatory site, by MCP-1, RANTES and SCF, to selectively secrete proinflammatory molecules; these could include growth factors, histamine, which is mitogenic (H1) and an immunosuppressant (H2), neovascularization agents, such as heparin, IL-8, and VEGF, as well as proteases that could permit new blood vessel formation. Neurogenic inflammation involves vasodilation and plasma protein extravasation in response to neural stimulation. Upon stimulation, sensory neurons release Substance P and other neuropeptides and activate neurokinin-1 receptors leading to plasma protein extravasation from post-capillary venules. Substance P is a neuropeptide that is released from nerve endings in many tissues and plays an important role in immunological and inflammatory states, and it is also a mediator of tissue injury, asthma, arthritis, allergy and autoimmune diseases. SP-positive nerve fibers and mast cell contacts are increased by acute stress in mice leading to dermal mast cell degranulation. VEGF is produced by flammatory cells. IL-33 is the newest inflammatory member of the IL-1 cytokine family and we show here that SP can induce VEGF secretion from mast cells and IL-33 augments the effect of SP in VEGF transcription and translation protein.
  Pulmonary fibrosis is characterized by progressive worsening of pulmonary function leading to a high incidence of death. Currently, however, there has been little progress in therapeutic strategies for pulmonary fibrosis. There have been several reports on cytokines being associated with lung fibrosis, including interleukin (IL)-6 and transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1. We reported recently that two substances (ATRA and thalidomide) have preventive effects on pulmonary fibrosis by inhibiting IL-6-dependent proliferation and TGF-β1-dependent transdifferentiation of lung fibroblasts. Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic autoimmune disorder, and its pathogenesis is also characterized by an association with several cytokines. It has been reported that calpain, a calcium-dependent intracellular cysteine protease, plays an important role in the progression of rheumatoid arthritis. In this study, we examined the preventive effect of Calpeptin, a calpain inhibitor, on bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis. We performed histological examinations and quantitative measurements of IL-6, TGF-β1, collagen type Iα1 and angiopoietin-1 in bleomycin-treated mouse lung tissues with or without the administration of Calpeptin. Calpeptin histologically ameliorated bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis in mice. Calpeptin decreased the expression of IL-6, TGF-β1, angiopoietin-1 and collagen type Iα1 mRNA in mouse lung tissues. In vitro studies disclosed that Calpeptin reduced (i) production of IL-6, TGF-β1, angiopoietin-1 and collagen synthesis from lung fibroblasts; and (ii) both IL-6-dependent proliferation and angiopoietin-1-dependent migration of the cells, which could be the mechanism underlying the preventive effect of Calpeptin on pulmonary fibrosis. These data suggest the clinical use of Calpeptin for the prevention of pulmonary fibrosis.
  Ionizing radiation causes DNA damage and consequent apoptosis, mainly due to the production of hydroxyl radicals that follows radiolytic splitting of water. However, superoxide and hydrogen peroxide also form and induce oxidative stress with resulting lysosomal membrane permeabilization (LMP) arising from iron-catalyzed oxidative events. The latter will significantly contribute to radiation-induced cell death and its degree largely depends on the quantities of lysosomal redox-active iron present as a consequence of autophagy and endocytosis of iron-rich compounds. Therefore, radiation sensitivity might be depressed by lysosome-targeted iron-chelators. Here we show that cells in culture are significantly protected from ionizing radiation damage if initially exposed to the lipophilic iron-chelator salicylaldehyde isonicotinoyl hydrazone (SIH), and that this effect is based on SIH-dependent lysosomal stabilization against oxidative stress. According to its dose-response-modifying effect, SIH is a most powerful radio-protector and a promising candidate for clinical application, mainly to reduce the radiation sensitivity of normal tissue. We propose, as an example, that inhalation of SIH prior to each irradiation session by patients undergoing treatment for lung malignancies would protect normally aerated lung tissue against life-threatening pulmonary fibrosis, while the sensitivity of malignant lung tumors, which usually are non-aerated, will not be affected by inhaled SIH.
  A dog model has been used to evaluate histological changes arising from senescence. Autopsies of 145 Portuguese Water Dogs have been used to evaluate the individual and group "state of health" at time of death. For each dog, weights or dimensions of organs or tissues were obtained, together with histological evaluation of tissues. Twenty-three morphological metrics correlated significantly to age at death. Many of these involved muscles; others were associated with derivatives of embryonic foregut. The latter included lengths of the small intestine and trachea as well as weights of the stomach and some lung lobes. Nearly all of the dogs examined had histological changes in multiple tissues, ranging from two to 12 per dog. Associations among pathologies included inflammatory bowel disease with osteoporosis and dental calculus/periodontitis with atherosclerosis and amyloidosis. In addition, two clusters of histological changes were correlated to aging: hyperplasia, frequency of adenomas, and hemosiderosis constituted one group; inflammation, plasmacytic and lymphocytic infiltration, fibrosis, and atrophy, another. Heritability analysis indicated that many of the changes in tissue/organ morphology or histology could be heritable and possibly associated with IGF1, but more autopsies will be required to substantiate these genetic relationships.
  Survival of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in cystic fibrosis (CF) chronic infections is based on a genetic adaptation process consisting of mutations in specific genes, which can produce advantageous phenotypic switches and ensure its persistence in the lung. Among these, mutations inactivating the regulators MucA (alginate biosynthesis), LasR (quorum sensing) and MexZ (multidrug-efflux pump MexXY) are the most frequently observed, with those inactivating the DNA mismatch repair system (MRS) being also highly prevalent in P. aeruginosa CF isolates, leading to hypermutator phenotypes that could contribute to this adaptive mutagenesis by virtue of an increased mutation rate. Here, we characterized the mutations found in the mucA, lasR, mexZ and MRS genes in P. aeruginosa isolates obtained from Argentinean CF patients, and analyzed the potential association of mucA, lasR and mexZ mutagenesis with MRS-deficiency and antibiotic resistance. Thus, 38 isolates from 26 chronically infected CF patients were characterized for their phenotypic traits, PFGE genotypic patterns, mutations in the mucA, lasR, mexZ, mutS and mutL gene coding sequences and antibiotic resistance profiles. The most frequently mutated gene was mexZ (79%), followed by mucA (63%) and lasR (39%) as well as a high prevalence (42%) of hypermutators being observed due to loss-of-function mutations in mutL (60%) followed by mutS (40%). Interestingly, mutational spectra were particular to each gene, suggesting that several mechanisms are responsible for mutations during chronic infection. However, no link could be established between hypermutability and mutagenesis in mucA, lasR and mexZ, indicating that MRS-deficiency was not involved in the acquisition of these mutations. Finally, although inactivation of mucA, lasR and mexZ has been previously shown to confer resistance/tolerance to antibiotics, only mutations in MRS genes could be related to an antibiotic resistance increase. These results help to unravel the mutational dynamics that lead to the adaptation of P. aeruginosa to the CF lung.
  OBJECTIVE: Several lines of evidence suggest that the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is of major importance in the pathogenesis of SSc. Protein and lipid damage have previously been demonstrated, but scarce data are available on oxidative damage to DNA. In patients with SSc, we evaluated levels of 8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine (8-oxodG), the main validated biomarker of endogenous oxidative damage to DNA, compared to levels of F2-isoprostane, a product of free radical-mediated peroxidation of arachidonic acid. METHODS: Urinary levels of 8-oxodG and 8-isoprostaglandin-F2α (8-iso-PGF2α) were determined by competitive ELISA method in consecutive SSc patients and controls matched for age and sex. RESULTS: We included 80 unrelated SSc patients (72 women, mean age 56 ± 11 yrs) and 39 controls (33 women, mean age 64 ± 8 yrs). Urinary levels of 8-oxodG/creat and 8-iso-PGF2α/creat in SSc patients were found to be higher than in controls (6.5 ng/mg vs 3.7 ng/mg, p = 0.0001; and 11.4 ng/mg vs 4.2 ng/mg, p < 0.0001). In multivariate analysis, 8-oxodG levels were associated with the presence of pulmonary fibrosis on computerized tomography scan, decreased forced vital capacity, and decreased DLCO/alveolar volume. In patients with the diffuse cutaneous subset, a modified Rodnan skin score > 14 was independently associated with 8-oxodG levels. In SSc, 8-oxodG and 8-iso-PGF2α values were correlated (r = 0.32; p = 0.005). CONCLUSION: Our study confirmed marked oxidative stress in SSc. We also found increased values of 8-oxodG in SSc patients and a relevant association with a fibrotic phenotype. The predictive value of this marker and its potential influence on fibrotic disturbances remain to be determined.
  OBJECTIVE: Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a rare connective tissue disease in childhood. We compared the characteristics of adult patients with juvenile-onset SSc (jSSc) from a single-center cohort to an adult-onset group. METHODS: Patients with disease onset before the age of 17 years were included in the jSSc cohort, while subjects with SSc onset after age 17 formed the adult-onset cohort. RESULTS: We identified 52 adult subjects with jSSc and compared them to 954 patients with adult-onset SSc. The mean ± SD age at disease onset of the patients with jSSc was 14 ± 2 years, 39 (75%) of them were women, and 24 (46%) had the diffuse cutaneous subset of SSc (dcSSc). There were no differences between the 2 cohorts in terms of sex and disease subset. Overlaps were significantly more frequent among the jSSc cohort (37%) compared to the adult-onset group (18%; p = 0.002). Autoantibody analysis demonstrated significantly more antitopoisomerase I antibody-positive subjects (33% vs 20%; p = 0.034) and significantly fewer anticentromere antibody-positive subjects (2% vs 25%; p < 0.001) in the jSSc cohort. Compared to the adult-onset group at 10 years from disease onset, survival was significantly higher among the subjects with jSSc (98% vs 75%; p = 0.001), pulmonary arterial hypertension had a significantly lower incidence (2% vs 14%; p = 0.032), and there was no difference in terms of pulmonary fibrosis (22% vs 21%) and cardiac scleroderma (3% vs 2%) between the 2 groups. CONCLUSION: The high survival rates and lower proportion of dcSSc in the adult jSSc cohort may represent a survival bias.
  Staphylococcus aureus colonizes the lungs of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients and despite treatment with antibiotics results in recurrent and relapsing infections. With increasing duration of the infection, the bacterial population is exposed more and more to changing selective pressures exerted by the host immune system, to frequent therapeutic interventions, and to interference with other microorganisms. S. aureus has evolved a variety of strategies to adapt to these challenges: Recombination and mutation provide the population with a preselected heterogeneity, resulting in an inheritable shift of phenotypic traits. This includes the emergence of isolates with mutations in metabolic (e.g. small-colony variants) and regulatory (e.g. agr mutants) genes. Additionally, phages become mobilized with a higher frequency during infection, raising the propensity for recombination. On the other hand, S. aureus can also adapt to the CF lung using regulatory mechanisms which are not well understood in this context. The quorum-sensing system agr is not activated during lung infection in CF, which is consistent with a proposed biofilm mode of growth in the lungs and also with the observation that in CF patients the organism usually remains localized in the lungs without systemic manifestation. Altogether, adaptive processes result in the generation of a heterogeneous S. aureus population in the CF lung which is highly protected against antibiotic therapy, expressing factors necessary for persistence rather than virulence.
  One of the first pathogens which can be isolated from the airways of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients is Staphylococcus aureus, which often persists in this hostile environment for many months or even years. The increase in infections due to the methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) worldwide and even more the emergence of community-acquired MRSA, which differ from nosocomial MRSA by lack of multiresistance and carriage of a phage-encoded toxin, Panton-Valentine leukocidin, attracts new attention to the epidemiology, pathogenesis, and impact of S. aureus in the background of CF. In this review, recent data and studies will be reported and discussed to give an overview of the latest research.
  BACKGROUND: The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) alters the presentation of pulmonary tuberculosis (PTB), but it remains unclear whether alterations occur at a CD4 cell threshold or throughout HIV infection. OBJECTIVE: To better understand the relationship between CD4 count and clinical and radiographic presentation of PTB. SETTING AND DESIGN: Initial presentations of culture-confirmed PTB patients evaluated at a Ugandan national TB referral center and an affiliated research unit were compared by HIV status and across 11 CD4 cell count strata: 0-50 to >500 cells/μl. RESULTS: A total of 873 HIV-infected PTB cases were identified. Among HIV-infected PTB cases with CD4 < 50, 21% had a normal chest X-ray (CXR) vs. 2% with CD4 > 500, with a continuous trend across CD4 strata (test for trend, P < 0.001). All radiographic manifestations of PTB displayed significant trends across CD4 strata. HIV-infected vs. non-HIV-infected patients had no significant difference in CXR findings of miliary patterns or pleural effusion at CD4 > 100, normal CXR or fibrosis at CD4 > 150, adenopathy at CD4 > 250, and cavitation or upper lung disease at CD4 > 300. Twenty-three per cent of co-infected cases with CD4 < 50 and 1% with CD4 > 500 had negative acid-fast bacilli (AFB) smears, with a significant trend between (P < 0.001). CONCLUSION: Variations in CXR appearance and AFB smear correlate with CD4 decline in significant, continuous trends.
  HISTORY AND ADMISSION FINDINGS: A 36-year-old woman presented with dyspnea, dry cough and severe chest pain. She had been treated for persistent shoulder pain for several months. Clinical findings were non-conclusive. Lactate dehydrogenase was slightly elevated, C-reactive protein was increased. INVESTIGATIONS: A chest X-ray and subsequent computed tomography (CT) scans showed a lesion measuring 10×8 cm in the right upper pulmonary lobe. A CT-guided biopsy was obtained and the histological examination revealed a dense lymphocytic infiltrate with abundant blasts in addition to areas of necrosis and fibrosis. These findings were consistent with lymphomatoid granulomatosis grade III. TREATMENT AND COURSE: After 6 cycles of rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristin and prednisolone (R-CHOP), an early relapse developed which was treated with rituximab, ifosphamid, methotrexate and etoposide. Good partial remission was achieved after consolidating high-dose chemotherapy followed by autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT). After two years of rituximab maintenance treatment positron emission tomography (PET-CT) revealed an increase of metabolic activity. A second high-dose therapy was then combined with Y-90 ibritumomab tiuxetan, which was well tolerated. During remission the previously present lymphoma lesion of the lung was resected. Histology did not reveal any residual active lymphomatoid granulomatosis. Complete remission has so far been maintained for one year after ASCT. CONCLUSIONS: Combination of Y-90 ibritumomab tiuxetan and high-dose chemotherapy followed by ASCT may offer an efficacious and well-tolerated targeted treatment approach for patients with relapsed lymphomatoid granulomatosis.
  Airways inflammation, a pathological hallmark of asthma, is associated with the recruitment of pro-inflammatory and inflammatory cells like eosinophils, polymorphonuclear leucocytes cells, mononuclear cells, macrophages, epithelial desquamation, and airways remodeling with sub-epithelial fibrosis. Activated inflammatory cells along with the resident cells can generate pro-inflammatory mediators including oxidants such as superoxide radicals, reactive oxygen species (ROS), and reactive nitrogen species. One of such inflammatory mediator that has received considerable attention is the nitric oxide (NO(•)) generated by pulmonary macrophageal/epithelial cells. In this study, we have explored that systemic monocytes also get activated in asthma to produce oxidants like ROS and NO(•). We estimated the NO(•) production, nitric oxide synthase (NOS) activity, inducible NOS (iNOS) mRNA levels and total free radical activity (TFRA) in blood monocytes of healthy control subjects, untreated asthmatic patients, patients on corticosteroid for less than 6 months and patients on corticosteroid for more than 6 months. Increase in NOS activity, NO(•) levels, and TFRA was observed in monocytes of asthmatic patients. The increase was found to be associated with the transcriptional upregulation of iNOS gene and severity of disease. Highest values of NOS activity, NO(•), and iNOS mRNA were found in the patients with acute asthma. Corticosteroid administration was found to be effective in reversing the induction of iNOS mRNA levels, NOS activity and NO(•) levels. Corticosteroids controlled asthma appears to have association with NOS, NO(•), and TFRA in systemic monocytes of the patients.
  The fourth AACR Special Conference on The Role of Telomeres and Telomerase in Cancer Research was held February 27 to March 2, 2010 in Fort Worth, TX. The meeting was organized to bring together those interested in the basic molecular mechanisms that govern telomere dynamics and stability with those interested in the clinical implications of telomere dysfunction and the use of telomeres and telomerase as therapeutic targets. The meeting was extremely successful as evidenced by the attendance and quality of the presentations. Indeed, several important themes emerged including (a) the intricate connection between the DNA replication and repair machineries in basic telomere replication and stability, (b) the complex interplay between the telomere-specific shelterin components and DNA repair proteins, (c) the nontelomeric functions of TERT in numerous cell types including stem cells, (d) a growing appreciation for the connection that exists between telomere maintenance deficiency states and diverse conditions such as idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and hematopoietic malignancies, and (e) the successful progression of agents targeting telomerase directly and immunologically to phase III clinical trials. Evident at the meeting was the vibrant energy that permeates the telomere field and the important biological and medical findings that it continues to yield.
  Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease has now been definitely associated with pulmonary symptoms and diseases, such as asthma, cough, chronic bronchitis, pneumonia, and pulmonary fibrosis; otolaryngologic symptoms and findings include hoarseness, pharyngitis, cough, laryngitis, subglottic stenosis, globus, and laryngeal cancer. Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease is also associated with noncardiac chest pain, dental erosion, sinusitis and sleep apnoea. This discussion focuses on some of these extra-oesophageal presentations of gastro-oesophageal reflux disease and the general management of these individuals.
  Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is an interstitial lung disease (ILD) affecting the pulmonary interstitium. Other forms of interstitial lung disease exist, and in some cases, an environmental etiology can be delineated. The diagnosis of IPF is typically established by high-resolution CT scan. IPF tends to have a worse prognosis than other forms of ILD. Familial cases of IPF also exist, suggesting a genetic predisposition; telomerase mutations have been observed to occur in familial IPF, which may also explain the increase in IPF with advancing age. Alveolar epithelial cells are believed to be the primary target of environmental agents that have been putatively associated with IPF. These agents may include toxins, viruses, or the autoantibodies found in collagen vascular diseases. The mechanism of disease is still unclear in IPF, but aberrations in fibroblast differentiation, activation, and proliferation may play a role. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition may also be an important factor in the pathogenesis, as it may lead to accumulation of fibroblasts in the lung and a disruption of normal tissue structure. Abnormalities in other components of the immune system, including T cells, B cells, and dendritic cells, as well as the development of ectopic lymphoid tissue, have also been observed to occur in IPF and may play a role in the stimulation of fibrosis that is a hallmark of the disease. It is becoming increasingly clear that the pathogenesis of IPF is indeed a complex and convoluted process that involves numerous cell types and humoral factors.
  OBJECTIVES: To test the presumption that Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates responsible for initial lung infection in individuals with cystic fibrosis (CF) are invariably susceptible to antipseudomonal agents. METHODS: Antibiotic susceptibility was determined (MIC and Etest) in two populations of P. aeruginosa associated with initial lung infection. Population 1: environmental isolates (n=78). Population 2: clinical isolates responsible for first infection in previously non-infected patients (85 isolates from 85 patients). Susceptibility or resistance was determined using current BSAC guidelines; ninth version (2009). RESULTS: The majority (≥ 90%) of isolates in both bacterial populations were susceptible to the front-line antipseudomonal agents; colistin, ciprofloxacin, tobramycin, ceftazidime, amikacin and meropenem. Up to 10% of isolates were resistant to one or more antibiotics. A single isolate from each population would be defined as resistant to tobramycin based on a breakpoint (>128 mg/L) that has been suggested for use in patients receiving inhaled therapy. CONCLUSIONS: The high prevalence of susceptibility found in P. aeruginosa isolates associated with initial infection contrasts with the high prevalence of resistance found in isolates from chronic CF lung infection. However, susceptibility in early isolates cannot be presumed. Until further data are obtained from clinically based studies, susceptibility tests should continue to be performed to assist the choice of antibiotics for treatment of early infection.
  Hypermutable (or mutator) microorganisms are those that have an increased spontaneous mutation rate due to defects in DNA repair or error avoidance systems. Over last decade, several studies have provided strong evidence of a relevant role of mutators in the evolution of natural bacterial populations, with a special emphasis in the field of infectious diseases. Among them, chronic respiratory infection by Pseudomonas aeruginosa in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients was the first natural environment revealing a high prevalence and important role of mutators. High frequencies of mutators have also been noted for other pathogens in the CF setting, particularly Staphylococcus aureus and Haemophilus influenzae. In addition to a strong statistical link between hypermutation and antibiotic resistance (i.e., mutators are more frequently resistant against antibiotics) obtained from the analysis of collections of clinical isolates from CF patients, several in vitro and in vivo experiments have further highlighted the dramatic consequences of hypermutation, especially when acting on microorganisms that are genetically equipped to acquire efficient resistance to most antibiotics by mutations in chromosomal genes such as P. aeruginosa. Recent studies additionally showed that mutators accelerate genetic adaptation of P. aeruginosa to the airways of CF patients and that patients infected by mutator strains have a poorer lung function. Further prospective clinical studies are nevertheless needed for a deep evaluation of the impact of mutators in disease progression and outcome. Future research should particularly focus on the investigation of the optimal therapeutical strategies to prevent the emergence of mutator strains in the lungs of CF patients and to avoid multiple-antimicrobial resistance development if they have already been selected.
  INTRODUCTION: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a multi-organ inflammatory disorder associated with high cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. We sought to assess cardiac involvement using a comprehensive cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (cMRI) approach and to determine its association with disease characteristics in RA patients without symptomatic cardiac disease. METHODS: RA patients with no history and/or clinical findings of systemic or pulmonary hypertension, coronary artery disease, severe valvular heart disease, atrial fibrillation, diabetes mellitus, or echocardiographic abnormalities underwent contrast-enhanced cMRI on a 1.5T scanner. Adenosine triphosphate was used to assess perfusion defects due to microvascular impairment or ischemia, and delayed enhanced imaging was obtained for the assessment of myocardial inflammation/fibrosis. We explored the associations of cMRI abnormalities with RA disease activity and severity measures. RESULTS: Eighteen patients (78% female) with a mean age of 57 +/- 10 years were studied. Eight patients (45%) demonstrated a myocardial abnormality. Perfusion defects under pharmacologic stress were seen in two patients (11%), one of whom had a circumferential subendocardial perfusion defect and one had a non-segmental subendocardial perfusion defect. Seven patients (39%) were found to have delayed enhancement, only one of whom also demonstrated a perfusion defect. Mean disease activity score (DAS)28 was significantly higher in the group with delayed enhancement compared to the group without by an average of 1.32 DAS28 units (4.77 vs. 3.44 units, respectively; P=0.011). Corresponding trends to statistical significance were noted in systemic inflammatory markers, with both C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) quantitatively higher in the group with delayed enhancement. Other RA characteristics, such as disease duration, autoantibody status, and current treatments were not significantly associated with cardiac involvement. CONCLUSIONS: Myocardial abnormalities, as detected by cMRI, were frequent in RA patients without known cardiac disease. Abnormal cMRI findings were associated with higher RA disease activity, suggesting a role for inflammation in the pathogenesis of myocardial involvement in RA.
  BACKGROUND: Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are disorders of the lung parenchyma. They share the common denominators of a progressive nature and poor prognosis. The goal was to use non-biased proteomics to discover new markers for these diseases. METHODS: Proteomics of fibrotic vs. control lung tissue suggested decreased levels of several spots in the lung specimens of IPF patients, which were identified as Hemoglobin (Hb) α and β monomers and Hbα complexes. The Hbα and β monomers and complexes were investigated in more detail in normal lung and lung specimens of patients with IPF and COPD by immunohistochemistry, morphometry and mass spectrometry (MS). RESULTS: Both Hb monomers, in normal lung, were expressed especially in the alveolar epithelium. Levels of Hbα and β monomers and complexes were reduced/lost in IPF but not in the COPD lungs when compared to control lung. MS-analyses revealed Hbα modification at cysteine105 (Cysα105), preventing formation of the Hbα complexes in the IPF lungs. Hbα and Hbβ were expressed as complexes and monomers in the lung tissues, but were secreted into the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and/or induced sputum supernatants as complexes corresponding to the molecular weight of the Hb tetramer. CONCLUSIONS: The abundant expression of the oxygen carrier molecule Hb in the normal lung epithelium and its decline in IPF lung are new findings. The loss of Hb complex formation in IPF warrants further studies and may be considered as a disease-specific modification.
  Aztreonam is a monobactam antibacterial with bactericidal activity against a wide range of aerobic Gram-negative bacteria, including Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Aztreonam lysine for inhalation solution (AZLI) does not contain the potentially inflammatory component arginine, which is used as a buffer in the intravenous formulation. Two phase III, randomized, placebo-controlled trials (AIR-CF1 and AIR-CF2) have been completed with AZLI in cystic fibrosis patients with pulmonary P. aeruginosa infection. In AIR-CF1, respiratory symptoms were significantly improved with AZLI compared with placebo, as assessed by the respiratory symptoms domain of the Cystic Fibrosis Questionnaire-Revised, a disease-specific, patient-reported outcome instrument. The mean treatment effect exceeded the minimal clinically important difference. In AIR-CF2, AZLI was compared with placebo following a 28-day course of tobramycin inhalation solution. AZLI was associated with a significant delay in the need for inhaled or intravenous antipseudomonal antibacterials, as determined by the presence of one of four predefined symptoms shown to be predictive of pulmonary exacerbations. An open-label extension of these trials (AIR-CF3) also demonstrated clinical efficacy with repeated courses of AZLI over 18 months and was not associated with sustained reductions in P. aeruginosa susceptibility. AZLI was also associated with improved pulmonary function and reductions in P. aeruginosa density in sputum in clinical trials. The tolerability profile of AZLI was generally similar to that of placebo in randomized controlled trials, with respiratory symptoms being the most frequently reported adverse events.
  In N. America, over the past decade, various airway clearance techniques (ACT) have been introduced for the treatment of cystic fibrosis (CF). We hypothesized that autogenic drainage (AD), an ACT developed in Belgium would be as effective as postural drainage with percussion (PD) in treating patients with CF.METHODS: Thirty-six CF patients, aged 12-18 years, with Shwachman score 65-98, were enrolled in a 2-year cross-over trial. Patients were matched as pairs and members of each pair were randomly assigned to two groups. For the first study year, Group A performed PD while Group B performed AD. At the end of 1 year Groups A and B crossed over physiotherapy techniques. Clinical status and pulmonary function (FVC, FEV(1), FEF(25-75)) were measured at 3 monthly intervals. Only results from the first year of the study are reported, as 10 out of 17 patients who had completed performing AD for the first year refused to change back to PD for the second year. RESULTS: During the first year of the study, both the AD and PD groups demonstrated improved pulmonary function with no significant difference between the two groups. Change in FVC and FEV(1) percent predicted for Groups A and B was 0.47 ± 1.65(se) versus 2.35 ± 1.51(se) and 2.09 ± 2.2(se) versus 0.92 ± 2.25(se). However, CF patients exhibited a marked preference for the AD technique. Results suggest that both AD and PD are effective methods of performing physiotherapy for CF patients and that the benefits of either technique are enhanced by measures which encourage adherence. Pediatr. Pulmonol. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
  OBJECTIVE: To use clinical and spirometry findings in order to distinguish between the restrictive and nonspecific patterns of pulmonary function test results in patients with low FVC and a normal or elevated FEV1/FVC ratio. METHODS: We analyzed the pulmonary function test results of 211 adult patients submitted to spirometry and lung volume measurements. We used the clinical diagnosis at the time spirometry was ordered, together with various functional data, in order to distinguish between patients presenting with a "true" restrictive pattern (reduced TLC) and those presenting with a nonspecific pattern (normal TLC). RESULTS: In the study sample, TLC was reduced in 144 cases and was within the normal range in 67. The most common causes of a nonspecific pattern were obstructive disorders, congestive heart failure, obesity, bronchiolitis, interstitial diseases, and neuromuscular disorders. In patients given a working diagnosis of pulmonary fibrosis, pleural disease, or chest wall disease, the positive predictive value (PPV) for restriction was >or= 90%. In males, an FVC <or= 60% of predicted had a PPV for restriction of 98.8%. In females, the restrictive pattern was found in 84.4% of those with an FVC <or= 50% of predicted. A difference of >or= 0% between the FEV1% and the FVC% had a PPV for restriction of 89.5%. After performing logistic regression, we developed a point scale for predicting the restrictive pattern. CONCLUSIONS: In many patients with reduced FEV1, reduced FVC, and a normal FEV1/FVC ratio, the restrictive pattern can be identified with confidence through the use of an algorithm that takes the clinical diagnosis and certain spirometry measurements into account.
  AIM: The examine the cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis in apolipoprotein E-deficient mice (ApoE-/- mice) fed a "Western-style diet" and the effect of simvastatin intervention. METHODS: Male ApoE-/- mice (n=36) were fed a "Western-style diet" from the age of 8 weeks. After 16 weeks, they were randomly given either simvastatin (25 mg·kg⁻¹·d⁻¹) or normal saline (control group) by gavage for 8, 16, or 24 weeks. The left ventricular (LV) wall thickness and diameter of the myocardial cells were determined with Hematoxylin-Eosin stain, and the level of fibrosis of the myocardial matrix was assessed with Masson stain. Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting analysis were used to determine the mRNA and protein expression of matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9), Cathepsin S (Cat S), and the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) in the myocardium of ApoE-/- mice. RESULTS: ApoE-/- mice fed a "Western-style diet" showed an significant age-dependent increase in total cholesterol (TC), LV wall thickness, myocardial cell diameter and LV collagen content (P<0.05). The simvastatin treatment group showed significantly reduced LV wall thickness, myocardial cell diameters and LV collagen content at 40 weeks when compared with the control group (P<0.05). Furthermore, treatment with simvastatin also significantly inhibited the mRNA and protein expressions of MMP-9 and Cat S as well as increased the mRNA and protein expressions of PPAR alpha and PPAR gamma at 32 and 40 weeks compared with the control group (P<0.05). CONCLUSION: ApoE-/- mice fed a "Western-style diet" had cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis, which worsened with age. Simvastatin treatment inhibits the development of cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis, and this effect may be mediated through increased levels of PPAR alpha and PPAR gamma and reduced levels of TC, MMP-9, and Cat S.
  CC chemokines play an important role in the pathogenesis of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). Few studies have evaluated the efficacy of therapeutically targeting CC chemokines and their receptors during interstitial lung diseases. In the present study, the therapeutic effects of Evasin-1, a tick-derived Chemokine-Binding Protein that has high affinity for CCL3/MIP-1α, was investigated in a murine model of bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis. CCL3/MIP-1α concentrations in lung homogenates increased significantly with time after bleomycin challenge and this was accompanied by increased number of leukocytes and elevated levels of CCL2/MCP-1, CCL5/RANTES, TNF-α and TGF-β1 and pulmonary fibrosis. Administration of Evasin-1 in a preventive (from the day of bleomycin administration) or therapeutic (from day 8 after bleomycin) schedule decreased number of leukocytes in the lung, reduced levels of TNF-α and TGF-β1 and attenuated lung fibrosis. These protective effects were similar to those observed in CCL3/MIP-1α -deficient mice (MIP-1α-/-). In conclusion, targeting CCL3/MIP-1α by treatment with Evasin-1 is beneficial in the context of bleomycin-induced lung injury, even when treatment is started after the fibrogenic insult. Mechanistically, Evasin-1 treatment was associated with decreased recruitment of leukocytes and production of fibrogenic cytokines. Modulation of CCL3/MIP-1α function by Evasin-1 could be useful for the treatment of IPF.
  Tenascin-C (TNC) is an extracellular matrix glycoprotein of unknown function that is highly expressed in adult lung parenchyma following acute lung injury (ALI). Here we report that mice lacking TNC are protected from interstitial fibrosis in the bleomycin model of ALI. Three weeks after exposure to bleomycin, TNC-null mice had accumulated 85% less lung collagen than wildtype mice. The lung interstitium of TNC-null mice also appeared to contain fewer myofibroblasts and fewer cells with intranuclear Smad-2/3 staining, suggesting impaired TGF-β activation or signaling. In vitro, TNC-null lung fibroblasts exposed to constitutively active TGF-β expressed less α-smooth muscle actin and deposited less collagen I into the matrix than wildtype cells. Impaired TGF-β responsiveness was correlated with dramatically reduced Smad-3 protein levels and diminished nuclear translocation of Smad-2 and Smad-3 in TGF-β-exposed TNC-null cells. Reduced Smad-3 in TNC-null cells reflects both decreased transcript abundance and enhanced ubiquitin-proteasome mediated protein degradation. Together, these studies suggest that TNC is essential for maximal TGF-β action after ALI. The clearance of TNC that normally follows ALI may restrain TGF-β action during lung healing, while prolonged or exaggerated TNC expression may facilitate TGF-β action and fibrosis after ALI.
  Adverse reactions to antibiotics in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) are a growing concern. We report the case of a pediatric patient with CF with multiple comorbidities and a history of drug reactions, who developed life-threatening piperacillin-induced immune hemolytic anemia. We review drug-induced hemolytic anemia (DIIHA) in particular, and antibiotic hypersensitivity in CF in general, including the frequency, pathogenesis, and risk factors. Finally, we discuss the treatment options and propose an algorithm for the management of drug-induced hypersensitivity reactions in patients with CF.
  OBJECTIVE: To investigate the adaptive responses of an in-patient exercise program in children with cystic fibrosis (CF) and evaluate the effects of sex. STUDY DESIGN: In total, 158 female and 186 male subjects with CF (age, 12 to 43 years) were studied during a 6-week rehabilitation course. A maximal incremental cycling test was used to determine exercise capacity and responses after 6 weeks of exercise training. Measures included lung function, peak oxygen uptake, peak workload, and peak heart rate. RESULTS: Lung function values were lower in males (P < .05). Females had a lower aerobic capacity (P < .05) at the beginning and at the end of the exercise training program. Similar training effects (P > .05) were seen between sexes in peak oxygen uptake (mL/min, mL/kg/min) and peak heart rate (beats/min) but not in peak workload (Watts, W/kg). CONCLUSIONS: The exercise program improved the fitness level similarly in females and males with CF. Basic physiological sex differences were still seen at the beginning and end of the training, despite the better lung function in females. Moreover, the finding suggested that fitness level and not lung function determined the response to training in CF, with those who were less fit at baseline having the largest response to training.
  BACKGROUND: As more patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) reach adulthood and participate in age-appropriate activities (e.g. employment, dating), disclosure of medical status becomes more important. This study assessed rates of disclosure and its perceived impact on relationships using the Adult Data for Understanding Lifestyle and Transitions (ADULT) online survey. METHODS: Adults with CF participated in the survey via the United States national network of CF Centers. Descriptive and inferential statistics were utilized. RESULTS: Participants (n = 865) were more likely to disclose to relatives (94%) and close friends (81%) than to dating partners (73%), bosses/supervisors/teachers (51%) or co-workers (39%). Respondents generally reported a neutral/positive effect on relationships following disclosure. Negative effects of disclosure were infrequent, but more likely with dating partners or bosses/supervisors/teachers. Results also indicated that disclosure may be influenced by severity of lung disease and gender, with those having normal/mild lung disease less likely to disclose their diagnosis to both co-workers (p < 0.01) and bosses/supervisors/teachers (p < 0.01), and women being more likely to disclose to close friends (p < 0.0001) and dating partners (p < 0.05) than men. CONCLUSIONS: Most adults with CF disclosed their disease to relatives and close friends. Individuals with severe CF lung disease were more likely to disclose their diagnosis to coworkers and supervisors/teachers. It may be helpful to provide support for disclosure of disease in situations such as employment and dating.
  Burkholderia cepacia complex (Bcc) is a group of Gram-negative pulmonary pathogens associated with life-threatening infections in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). The airway epithelium plays a crucial role in the initiation and modulation of inflammatory responses to these pathogens. Interleukin (IL)-8 released from epithelial cells is a potent chemoattractant for neutrophils. The aims of this study were to compare the IL-8 response to Bcc infection in different epithelial cell types and to investigate the impact of IL-8 on Bcc growth and intracellular survival. To compare epithelial cell IL-8 responses, 4 human epithelial cell lines were used in the study; A549 cells, an alveolar epithelial cell line, Calu-3 cells, a sub-bronchial epithelial cell line, 16HBE14o- cells, and CFBE41o- cells, which are CFTR-positive and CFTR-negative bronchial epithelial cell lines, respectively. Two B. multivorans and 2 B. cenocepacia strains all induced a significant IL-8 response by 12h and further increased in all cell lines at 24h. Furthermore, the levels of IL-8 from Calu-3 and A549 cells were approximately 3 times that of 16HBE14o- or CFBE41o- cells. In 2 of the cell lines examined (16HBE14o- and CFBE41o-), B. cenocepacia LMG 16656 (J2315), an epidemic strain, induced greater levels of IL-8 (P<0.01) compared to other Bcc strains tested. The CFTR-positive and -negative cell lines secreted similar levels of IL-8 indicating a CFTR-independent induction of IL-8. However, the CFTR-negative cells did secrete constitutive levels of IL-8 greater than that of CFTR-positive cells. An investigation of the effect of IL-8 on Bcc extracellular and intracellular growth found that at low concentrations (<10ng/ml) of recombinant human (rh) IL-8, the growth of B. cenocepacia LMG 16656 and B. multivorans LMG 13010 was enhanced, whereas at higher concentrations (10ng/ml), growth of both strains was significantly reduced. Growth of both non-CF Bcc strains remained unchanged in the presence of rhIL-8. In contrast to extracellular growth, higher concentrations (10ng/ml) of rhIL-8 enhance the intracellular growth and survival of both LMG 16656 and LMG 13010 in 16HBE14o- and CFBE41o- cell lines. Although LMG 13010 uptake by epithelial cells was higher than LMG 16656 (P<0.01), the intracellular growth of LMG 16656 is greater than LMG 13010 (P<0.05). These studies demonstrated that the type of epithelial cells encountered by Bcc strains determines the extent of the IL-8 responses triggered and that this cytokine in addition to its well-established proinflammatory properties can enhance both the extracellular and intracellular growth of Bcc strains.
  CONTEXT: Intensive treatments intended to sustain life are often used for patients with advanced cystic fibrosis (CF). There are no guidelines for selecting patients whose survival and quality of life may be enhanced by such treatments or for communication with patients and caregivers about possible treatment outcomes. OBJECTIVES: We aimed to describe caregivers' perspectives on decision making for the use of intensive treatments for patients with advanced CF lung disease. METHODS: We conducted semi-structured interviews with 36 caregivers of 36 patients who died of CF about treatment preference discussions and solicited recommendations for improving discussions. RESULTS: Twenty (56%) patients received intensive treatments during the last week of life. Twenty-two (61%) caregivers reported ever having discussed intensive treatment preferences with a physician, and 17 (77%) of these discussions were initiated during an acute illness. Only 14 (39%) of all patients participated. Caregivers expressed less certainty about consistency of treatments with patient preferences when patients did not participate. Twenty-nine (81%) caregivers endorsed first discussing treatment preferences during a period of medical stability. CONCLUSIONS: Discussions about preferences for the use of intensive treatments for patients with CF often take place during episodes of acute illness and may be delayed until patients themselves are too ill to participate. Bereaved caregivers suggest first addressing intensive treatment preferences during a stable period so that patient preferences are understood and unwanted treatments are minimized.
  Lung transplantation has been established as an appropriate ultimate treatment strategy in end-stage lung disease, when all conventional therapeutic options have been exhausted. Acute and potentially reversible lung diseases (ARDS, pneumonia) and malignancy (broncho-alveolar carcinoma) are not established indications. Retrospective analyses on the natural course of the disease and new medical treatment options have led to fewer transplantations in recipients with emphysema and idiopathic pulmonary hypertension. In end-stage cystic fibrosis and patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, alternative treatment options are currently not available and lung transplantation is indicated. The available guidelines for candidate selection should be followed. Internationally, there is a trend towards a benefit-orientated allocation of organs. Recommendations for candidate selection, surgical innovations and, especially, the improved long-term follow-up have led to improved results in the last two decades. Long-term results are, however, still unsatisfactory in comparison to liver and kidney transplantations. The main obstacles to long-term survival and causes of death are chronic allograft dysfunction (bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome, BOS) and infections. In the future, the pathogenesis and treatment options for these two entities should be clarified. A further essential task is to increase the donor pool in the future because the current waiting list mortality is approximately 20 %.
  Sarcoidosis and lung fibrosis were first described by histopathology in the 19th century. Since then a large number of different forms of diffuse parenchymal lung diseases has been identified. Although all these diseases manifest in the lung interstitium, there is a wide range of predominanthy inflammatory to purely fibrotic disease processes. Accordingly, anti-inflammatory treatment is successful in the former, whereas for the latter an effective medical therapy is lacking. Gene technology has recently led to results which have fundamentally changed our understanding of the pathophysiology of fibrosing lung disease. Early and differential diagnosis has much improved with the help of high-resolution computed tomography. Recent clinical trials in patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis have shown at least some effectiveness for the antioxidant treatment approach using high-dosed N-acetylcysteine as well as for the use of pirfenidone. Importantly, these studies have proven that well-designed treatment trials are feasible in this patient population. This has kindled the hope that, based on a better understanding of the pathophysiology, new targeted therapies will prove to be successful in the future.
  Scleroderma is a disease characterized by immune activation, vasculopathy, fibroblast stimulation, and connective tissue fibrosis. End-organ damage occurs due to progressive tissue fibrosis and vasculopathy. Markers of incipient vasculopathy have not been well studied in scleroderma. However, reduced renal functional reserve and proteinuria are common indicators of progressive vasculopathy in diabetic and hypertensive vasculopathy. Recent studies suggest a strong association between renal involvement and outcomes in scleroderma, with a threefold increased risk of mortality from pulmonary hypertension if renal insufficiency is present. We review the types of renal involvement seen in scleroderma and the data to support the use of renal parameters including proteinuria, glomerular filtration rate, and renal vascular dynamics measured with Doppler ultrasound to identify subclinical renal insufficiency. Further studies are warranted to investigate the use of renal parameters as prognostic indicators in scleroderma.
  Pulmonary fibrosis is a progressive and lethal lung disease characterized by accumulation of extracellular matrix and loss of pulmonary function. No cure exists for this pathologic condition, and current treatments often fail to slow its progression or relieve its symptoms. Relaxin was previously shown to induce a matrix degrading phenotype in human lung fibroblasts in vitro and to inhibit pulmonary fibrosis in vivo. A novel peptide which targets the relaxin RXFP1/LGR7 receptor was recently identified using our computational platform designed to predict novel G protein-coupled receptor peptide agonists. In this study, we examined the anti-fibrotic properties of this novel peptide, designated CGEN25009, in human cell based assays and in a murine model of bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis. Similarly to relaxin, CGEN25009 was found to have an inhibitory effect on TGF-β1-induced collagen deposition in human dermal fibroblasts, while enhancing MMP-2 expression. The peptide's biological activity was also similar to relaxin in generating cellular stimulation of cAMP, cGMP and NO in the THP-1 human cell line. In vivo, 2-week administration of CGEN25009 in a preventive or therapeutic mode, i.e. concurrently with or 7 days after bleomycin treatment, respectively, caused a significant reduction of lung inflammation and injury, and ameliorated adverse airway remodeling and peri-bronchial fibrosis. The results of this study indicate that CGEN25009 displays anti-fibrotic and anti-inflammatory properties and may offer a new therapeutic option for the treatment of pulmonary fibrosis.
  Burkholderia cepacia complex (Bcc) is a group of opportunistic cystic fibrosis (CF) pathogens that invade lung epithelial cells. The mechanisms of invasion are poorly understood, in particular, the receptors utilised by this bacterium in the invasion process have not been identified. The aim of this study was to investigate the epithelial receptors involved in the invasion of Bcc isolates. We confirmed that invasion into two lung epithelial cell lines (16HBE14o- and CFBE41o-) which have a non-CF and CF phenotype, respectively, is receptor mediated and showed that pre-treatment of these epithelial cell lines with α- or β-galactosidase reduced invasion of isolates of two species of Bcc, Burkholderia multivorans and Burkholderia cenocepacia. In contrast, removal of mucin had no significant effect. Biotinylated Bcc strains were shown to bind to purified glycolipids separated by thin layer chromatography, albeit different patterns of binding were associated with different strains. Invasion of CF lung epithelial cells (CFBE41o-) by all three Bcc strains examined was significantly reduced by treatment of cells with inhibitors of glycolipid biosynthesis. Although the specific glycolipid involved in each case has not been elucidated, it is apparent that invasion of lung epithelial cells is mediated via binding to glycosphingolipid receptors.
  INTRODUCTION: Although peak expiratory flow rate is the conventional way to measure asthma severity in adults, its use is problematic in children because it is effort dependent. Forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV(1)) and the ratio of FEV(1) to forced vital capacity (FEV(1)/FVC) are more accurate, but generally not available in the emergency department (ED). A better test is needed. Single-breath counting (SBC) is the measurement of how far an individual can count in a normal speaking voice after a maximal effort inhalation. The count is in cadence to a metronome set at 2 beats per second. Previous work has suggested that SBC correlates with standard measures of pulmonary function in adults. However, it has never been tested in children. OBJECTIVES: The aims of this study are to determine if SBC can be easily performed by children and to assess the correlation between SBC and standard measures of pulmonary function in a pediatric population. METHODS: This was a prospective observational study of a convenience sample of children presenting to the pulmonary clinic for scheduled pulmonary function testing (PFT). Peak expiratory flow rate, FEV(1), FVC, forced expiratory flow 25% to 75%, and FEV(1)/FVC were measured and recorded. After PFT, subjects were asked to perform SBC. Three attempts were allowed, and the average was recorded. Correlation was determined by the Pearson coefficient. RESULTS: Sixty-seven children (ages 5-18 years, 64% male) were enrolled. All were able to understand and complete the testing. Indications for PFT included asthma and/or allergies (n = 44), cystic fibrosis (n = 9), and other chronic diseases (n = 14). The correlations (r) of SBC to peak expiratory flow rate, FEV(1), FVC, forced expiratory flow 25% to 75%, and FEV(1)/FVC were 0.55, 0.66, 0.71, 0.44, and -0.29, respectively (P < .05 for all results). CONCLUSION: Single-breath counting is easy to perform in children, seems to correlate well with standard measures of pulmonary function, and shows promise for measuring asthma severity in children. Further work to define the range of reference SBC values (as a function of age and/or body size) and an evaluation of the utility of SBC in an ED population of acute asthmatics is indicated.
  BACKGROUND: Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis is a chronic progressive lung disease with poor outcome and no effective treatment to date. This is an update of a Cochrane Review first published in 2003. OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of non-steroid agents in adults with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Register (30 March 2010), the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) (The Cochrane Library, Issue 1, 2010), Ovid MEDLINE to March week 5, 2010, EMBASE to week 13, 2010 and PubMed to April 2010, with additional handsearching, including abstracts of international conferences. We also contacted pharmaceutical companies and researchers in the field. SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised studies comparing non-steroid drugs with placebo or steroids in adults with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two authors independently assessed trial quality, extracted data and assessed risk of bias. We contacted pharmaceutical companies to obtain missing information, if any. We combined survival outcomes using Peto odds ratios or hazard ratios (HR). MAIN RESULTS: Fifteen trials involving 10 different drugs were included. Two trials enrolling 1156 patients compared interferon gamma-1beta with placebo: interferon gamma-1beta did not significantly improve survival (HR 0.88, 95% CI 0.47 to 1.64; P = 0.68). Four trials involving 1155 patients compared pirfenidone with placebo. Three trials, conducted in 1046 patients, provided data on progression-free survival: pirfenidone significantly reduced the risk of disease progression by 30% (HR 0.70, 95% CI 0.56 to 0.88, P = 0.002). Data on the effect of pirfenidone on pulmonary function could only be assessed for two studies analysing 314 patients. Forced vital capacity or vital capacity was significantly improved by pirfenidone (mean difference 0.08 L, 95% CI 0.03 to 0.13, P = 0.0006). AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Based on available data, partly still unpublished, pirfenidone appears to improve progression-free survival and, to a lesser extent, pulmonary function in patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. More data are needed on overall survival and quality of life on treatment. From the studies in this review, interferon gamma-1beta has not been shown to affect survival. Other agents evaluated in single studies either failed to provide evidence for a benefit or need to be assessed in larger randomised controlled trials.
  Not all patients with cystic fibrosis have abnormal sweat chloride levels, severe lung disease, or failure to thrive. These 2 cases remind us to think "outside the box".
  Asbestos is reported to cause pulmonary fibrosis, and its use has been banned. We examined the biopersistence and histopathological effect of rock wool (RW) fibers in rat lungs by a nose-only inhalation exposure study. Twenty-four rats were exposed to RW fibers for 6 h daily for 5 consecutive days. Six rats each were sacrificed shortly and 1, 2, and 4 wk after exposure, and the fiber numbers and sizes in lungs were determined. The fiber number in the lungs 4 wk after exposure significantly decreased. The clearance half time was 28 d for fibers with L > 20 mum and 50 d for World Health Organization fibers. The reasons for the decrease in number and size of fibers include: 1) discharge outside of the body by mucociliary movement, 2) dissolution by body fluid, and 3) phagocytosis and digestion by alveolar macrophages. Twelve rats were used for histopathological examination, and the pathological changes were classified by Wagner's criteria. As a result, changes up to only Grade 2 were observed. The reason for the increase in macrophage number was considered to be a transient reaction of body defense. These results suggest that RW has low biopersistence and only a limited pathological effect.
  Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), a heterogeneous disease with respect to clinical presentation and rates of progression, disproportionately affects older adults. The diagnosis of IPF is descriptive, based on clinical, radiologic, and histopathologic examination, and definitive diagnosis is hampered by poor interobserver agreement and lack of a consensus definition. There are no effective treatments. Cellular, molecular, genetic, and environmental risk factors have been identified for IPF, but the initiating event and the characteristics of preclinical stages are not known. IPF is predominantly a disease of older adults, and the processes underlying normal aging might significantly influence the development of IPF. Yet, the biology of aging and the principles of medical care for this population have been typically ignored in basic, translational, or clinical IPF research. In August 2009, the Association of Specialty Professors, in collaboration with the American College of Chest Physicians, the American Geriatrics Society, the National Institute on Aging, and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, held a workshop, summarized herein, to review what is known, to identify research gaps at the interface of aging and IPF, and to suggest priority areas for future research. Efforts to answer the questions identified will require the integration of geriatrics, gerontology, and pulmonary research, but these efforts have great potential to improve care for patients with IPF.
  The upregulation of nitric oxide (NO) by inflammatory cytokines and mediators in central and peripheral airway sites can be monitored easily in exhaled air. It is now possible to estimate the predominant site of increased fraction of exhaled NO (FeNO) and its potential pathologic and physiologic role in various pulmonary diseases. In asthma, increased FeNO reflects eosinophilic-mediated inflammatory pathways moderately well in central and/or peripheral airway sites and implies increased inhaled and systemic corticosteroid responsiveness. Recently, five randomized controlled algorithm asthma trials reported only equivocal benefits of adding measurements of FeNO to usual clinical guideline management including spirometry; however, significant design issues may exist. Overall, FeNO measurement at a single expiratory flow rate of 50 mL/s may be an important adjunct for diagnosis and management in selected cases of asthma. This may supplement standard clinical asthma care guidelines, including spirometry, providing a noninvasive window into predominantly large-airway-presumed eosinophilic inflammation. In COPD, large/central airway maximal NO flux and peripheral/small airway/alveolar NO concentration may be normal and the role of FeNO monitoring is less clear and therefore less established than in asthma. Furthermore, concurrent smoking reduces FeNO. Monitoring FeNO in pulmonary hypertension and cystic fibrosis has opened up a window to the role NO may play in their pathogenesis and possible clinical benefits in the management of these diseases.
  Indications for thoracic surgery in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) are principally represented by pleural diseases including pneumothorax, pleural effusion, and empyema and by parenchymal lung diseases including bronchiectasis, hemoptysis, and pulmonary abscess. Moreover, lung transplantation has proved a viable therapeutic option for progressive respiratory failure due to end-stage CF. Main surgical experiences in this setting are reviewed and discussed.
  Objective. SSc is an autoimmune disease characterized by fibrosis of the skin and internal organs. Although the aetiology remains uncertain, many reports have suggested that IL-6 is involved in SSc pathogenesis. Tocilizumab, an anti-IL-6 receptor antibody, is an anti-arthritis medicine that works through the blockade of IL-6 functions. To examine the effect of tocilizumab on SSc, we administered tocilizumab to two SSc patients. Methods. Two dcSSc patients were administered tocilizumab at 8 mg/kg once a month for 6 months. One patient had pulmonary fibrosis assessed by CT and spirometry, and the other had chronic renal failure caused by scleroderma renal crisis. Their skin condition was monitored with a Vesmeter and the modified Rodnan total skin score (mRTSS). Skin biopsies were obtained before and after the tocilizumab treatment to investigate the histological changes. Results. After tocilizumab treatment, both patients showed softening of the skin with reductions of 50.7 and 55.7% in the total z-score of Vesmeter hardness and 51.9 and 23.0% in the mRTSS, respectively. Histological examination showed thinning of the collagen fibre bundles in the dermis. The creatinine clearance in the patient with chronic renal failure improved from 38 to 55 ml/min. However, the fibrotic changes in the lung in the other patient remained unchanged. Conclusions. In the two cases of SSc that we report here, softening of the skin was observed during the treatment with tocilizumab.
  BACKGROUND: Gefitinib, an inhibitor of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase, is an effective treatment for epithelial tumors, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and is generally well tolerated. However, some clinical trials revealed that gefitinib exposure caused lung fibrosis, a severe adverse reaction. This study investigated the effect of gefitinib on lung fibrosis in mice. METHODS: We generated a mouse model of lung fibrosis induced by bleomycin to investigate the fibrotic effect of gefitinib. C57BL/6 mice were injected intratracheally with bleomycin or saline, with intragastric administration of gefitinib or saline. Lung tissues were harvested on day 14 or 21 for histology and genetic analysis. RESULTS: The histological results showed that bleomycin successfully induced lung fibrosis in mice, and gefitinib prevented lung fibrosis and suppressed the proliferation of S100A4-positive fibroblast cells. In addition, Western blotting analysis revealed that gefitinib decreased the expression of phosphorylated EGFR (p-EGFR). Furthermore, quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) demonstrated that gefitinib inhibited the accumulation of collagens I and III. CONCLUSIONS: These results reveal that gefitinib reduces pulmonary fibrosis induced by bleomycin in mice and suggest that administration of small molecule EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors has the potential to prevent pulmonary fibrosis by inhibiting the proliferation of mesenchymal cells, and that targeting tyrosine kinase receptors might be useful for the treatment of pulmonary fibrosis in humans.
  Reactive airway disease is often triggered by an upper respiratory viral infection and readily responds to anti-inflammatory and bronchodilator therapy. The differential diagnosis for unresponsive disease includes poorly controlled asthma, noncompliance with medical regimen, vocal cord dysfunction, rhinosinusitis, gastroesophageal reflux disease or recurrent aspiration, foreign body aspiration, allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, Churg-Strauss vasculitis, cardiac disorders such as congestive heart failure or mitral stenosis, or other pulmonary disorders such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, interstitial lung disease, bronchiectasis, sarcoidosis, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, pulmonary embolism, cystic fibrosis, airway neoplasms, or laryngotracheomalacia. As is often the case, a meticulous history can expeditiously direct the clinician to the diagnosis, especially in a patient without a smoking, asthmatic, or atopic history.
  Acute lung injury (ALI) and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) are characterized by non-cardiogenic pulmonary edema, respiratory distress and hypoxemia. Factor VII-activating protease (FSAP) is a plasma-derived protease which inhibits the proliferation and migration of hepatic stellate cells and vascular smooth muscle cells. This study was designed to determine the dynamic expression changes in FSAP in a bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis rat model and the influence of FSAP on human pulmonary fibroblasts (HPF). The expression of FSAP was examined in a rat model of bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis by immunohistochemical staining, quantitative real-time RT-PCR and Western blot analysis. The influence of FSAP on cell proliferation and migration of HPF was investigated by the BrdU incorporation assay and transwell cell culture chambers, respectively. The effect of FSAP on platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-stimulated p42/p44 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) activation on HPF was determined by Western blot analysis. FSAP was observed prominently in alveolar epithelial cells as well as microvascular endothelial cells of the lung parenchyma and was markedly increased at the early phase of bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis, but decreased at the late stage, particularly during the pulmonary fibrosis. FSAP inhibited PDGF-stimulated proliferation, migration, p42/p44 MAPK phosphorylation and collagen III synthesis of the HPF. We concluded that epithelial cells in lungs represent a source of FSAP at the early stage in acutely injured lung. Moreover, we demonstrated an inhibitory effect of FSAP on PDGF-stimulated proliferation and migration of HPF in vitro, suggesting that FSAP may modulate inflammation and exert a beneficial effect on ARDS.
  Upon activation, neutrophils release DNA fibers decorated with antimicrobial proteins, forming neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs). Although NETs are bactericidal and contribute to innate host defense, excessive NET formation has been linked to the pathogenesis of autoinflammatory diseases. However, the mechanisms regulating NET formation, particularly during chronic inflammation, are poorly understood. Here we show that the G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) CXCR2 mediates NET formation. Downstream analyses showed that CXCR2-mediated NET formation was independent of NADPH oxidase and involved Src family kinases. We show the pathophysiological relevance of this mechanism in cystic fibrosis lung disease, characterized by chronic neutrophilic inflammation. We found abundant NETs in airway fluids of individuals with cystic fibrosis and mouse cystic fibrosis lung disease, and NET amounts correlated with impaired obstructive lung function. Pulmonary blockade of CXCR2 by intra-airway delivery of small-molecule antagonists inhibited NET formation and improved lung function in vivo without affecting neutrophil recruitment, proteolytic activity or antibacterial host defense. These studies establish CXCR2 as a receptor mediating NADPH oxidase-independent NET formation and provide evidence that this GPCR pathway is operative and druggable in cystic fibrosis lung disease.
  We have identified a new role for the matrix enzyme lysyl oxidase-like-2 (LOXL2) in the creation and maintenance of the pathologic microenvironment of cancer and fibrotic disease. Our analysis of biopsies from human tumors and fibrotic lung and liver tissues revealed an increase in LOXL2 in disease-associated stroma and limited expression in healthy tissues. Targeting LOXL2 with an inhibitory monoclonal antibody (AB0023) was efficacious in both primary and metastatic xenograft models of cancer, as well as in liver and lung fibrosis models. Inhibition of LOXL2 resulted in a marked reduction in activated fibroblasts, desmoplasia and endothelial cells, decreased production of growth factors and cytokines and decreased transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) pathway signaling. AB0023 outperformed the small-molecule lysyl oxidase inhibitor beta-aminoproprionitrile. The efficacy and safety of LOXL2-specific AB0023 represents a new therapeutic approach with broad applicability in oncologic and fibrotic diseases.
  Several studies have implicated gamma herpesviruses, particularly Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV), in the progression of Idiopathic Pulmoinary Fibrosis (IPF). The data presented here examine the possible role that EBV plays in the potentiation of this disease by evaluating the pulmonary response to expression of the EBV lytic transactivator protein Zta. Expression of Zta in the lungs of mice via adenovirus mediated delivery (Adv-Zta) produced pro-fibrogenic inflammation that appeared most pronounced by day 7 post-exposure. Relative to mice exposed to control GFP-expressing adenovirus (Adv-GFP), mice exposed to Adv-Zta displayed evidence of lung injury and a large increase in inflammatory cells, predominately neutrophils, recovered by bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL). Cytokine and mRNA profiling of the BAL fluid and cells recovered from Adv-Zta-treated mice revealed a Th2 and Th17 bias. mRNA profiles from Adv-Zta-infected lung epithelial cells revealed consistent induction of mRNAs encoding Th2 cytokines. Co-expression in transient assays of wild-type Zta, but not a DNA-binding-defective mutant Zta, activated expression of the IL-13 promoter in lung epithelial cells and detection of IL-13 in Adv-Zta treated mice correlated with expression of Zta. Induction of Th2 cytokines in Zta-expressing mice corresponded with alternative activation of macrophages. In cell culture and in mice, Zta repressed lung epithelial cell markers. Despite the pro-fibrogenic character at day 7, the inflammation resolves by 28 days post-exposure to Adv-Zta without evidence of fibrosis. These observations indicate that the EBV lytic transactiavtor protein Zta displays activity consistent with a pathogenic role in pulmonary fibrosis associated with herpesvirus infection.
  Pseudomonas aeruginosa is an opportunistic pathogen that causes acute, invasive infections in immunocompromised individuals and chronic, persistent respiratory infections in individuals with cystic fibrosis (CF). The differential progression of acute or chronic infections involves the production of distinct sets of virulence factors. P. aeruginosa strains isolated from patients with acute respiratory infection are generally nonencapsulated and express a variety of invasive virulence factors, including flagella, the type III secretion system (T3SS), type IV pili (TFP), and multiple secreted toxins and degradative enzymes. Strains isolated from chronically infected CF patients, however, typically lack expression of invasive virulence factors and have a mucoid phenotype due to the production of an alginate capsule. The mucoid phenotype results from loss-of-function mutations in mucA, which encodes an anti-sigma factor that normally prevents alginate synthesis. Here, we report that the cyclic AMP/Vfr-dependent signaling (CVS) pathway is defective in mucA mutants and that the defect occurs at the level of vfr expression. The CVS pathway regulates the expression of multiple invasive virulence factors, including T3SS, exotoxin A, protease IV, and TFP. We further demonstrate that mucA-dependent CVS inhibition involves the alternative sigma factor AlgU (AlgT) and the response regulator AlgR but does not depend on alginate production. Our findings show that a single naturally occurring mutation leads to inverse regulation of virulence factors involved in acute and persistent infections. These results suggest that mucoid conversion and inhibition of invasive virulence determinants may both confer a selective advantage to mucA mutant strains of P. aeruginosa in the CF lung.
  Neutrophil serine proteases (NSPs) especially elastase are major agents of lung destruction in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. This study investigated SerpinB1, a highly efficient inhibitor of NSPs, in CF lung disease Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) from 31 children with CF and 24 control children were examined for amount and molecular species of SerpinB1, and its mechanism of action was studied. CF BALF had more SerpinB1 than control BALF, 3.9 (2.60 - 5.62) mug/ml (geometric means, 95% confidence intervals) versus 1.37 (1.20-1.55) mug/ml, p<0.001). BALF levels of SerpinB1 were higher for infected versus non-infected CF subjects (5.5 versus 2.7 mug/ml, p<0.04) and substantially higher for elastase-positive versus elastase-negative CF subjects (8.41 versus 1.89 mug/ml, p<0.001). Most SerpinB1 in CF BALF had been cleaved. Adding recombinant SerpinB1 to CF BALF stoichiometrically inhibited endogenous elastase, indicating that the inhibitor functions in the CF microenvironment. In vitro simulations comparing SerpinB1 and alpha1antitrypsin (SerpinA1) showed that both rapidly form irreversible inhibitory covalent complexes with elastase and that these differed in survival time. The SerpinB1-elastase complex survived only briefly due to fragmentation of bound elastase, releasing cleaved SerpinB1, the molecular form in CF BALF. The findings define an innate role for SerpinB1 in CF airways.
  BACKGROUND: C-C chemokine receptor (CCR)7 is a regulator of dendritic cell and T cell migration, and its role in tissue wound healing has been investigated in various disease models. We have previously demonstrated that CCR7 and its ligand, chemokine (C-C motif) ligand (CCL)21, modulates wound repair in pulmonary fibrosis (PF) but the mechanism of this is unknown. The objective of this study was to investigate whether the absence of CCR7 protects against bleomycin (BLM)-induced PF. CCR7-/- mice failed to mount a fibrotic pulmonary response as assessed by histologic collagen staining and quantification by hydroxyproline. We hypothesized that the prominent characteristics of CCR7-/- mice, including elevated levels of cytokine and chemokine mediators and the presence of bronchus-associated lymphoid tissue (BALT) might be relevant to the protective phenotype. RESULTS: Pulmonary fibrosis was induced in CCR7+/+ and CCR7-/- mice via a single intratracheal injection of BLM. We found that the lung cytokine/chemokine milieu associated with the absence of CCR7 correlated with an increase in BALT, and might be attributable to regulatory T cell (Treg) homeostasis and trafficking within the lungs and lymph nodes. In response to BLM challenge, CCR7-/- mice exhibited an early, steady increase in lung CD4+ T cells and increased CD4+ CD25+ FoxP3+ Tregs in the lungs 21 days after challenge. These findings are consistent with increased lung expression of interleukin-2 and indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase in CCR7-/- mice, which promote Treg expansion. CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates that the protective phenotype associated with BLM-treated CCR7-/- mice correlates with the presence of BALT and the anchoring of Tregs in the lungs of CCR7-/- mice. These data provide novel evidence to support the further investigation of CCR7-mediated Treg trafficking in the modulation of BLM-induced PF.
  Bleomycins (BLMs) are widely used in combination with chemotherapy for the treatment of a variety of cancers. The clinical application of BLMs is featured by the occurrence of sometimes fatal side effects, such as renal and lung toxicity, and the potential dose-limiting side effect of pulmonary fibrosis. Therefore, it is highly desirable to develop a sensitive method to quantitatively determine the BLM content in both pharmaceutical analysis and clinical samples, to make full use of therapeutic efficacy and to weaken its toxicity. Here, we proposed a simple, rapid, and convenient electrochemical assay for trace BLM detection. A reported DNA motif, as substrate for BLMs, is prepared to self-assemble onto the gold electrode to fabricate an electrochemical DNA (E-DNA) sensor, with a terminus tethered on the electrode surface and the other terminus labeled with ferrocenyl moiety as a signal reporter to form a stem-loop structure, giving an arise of remarkable faradaic current. In the presence of Fe(II)·BLM, the E-DNA sensor undergoes the irreversible cleavage event, which can be transduced into a significant decrease in current peak. This proposed sensor reveals an impressive sensitivity as low as 100 pM BLMs and exhibits a good performance as well as in serum sample. Considering the high sensitivity and specificity of this proposed sensor, as well as the cost-effective and simple-to-implement features of the electrochemical technique, we believe that this method shows distinct advantages over conventional methods and it is a promising alternative for the determination of trace amounts of BLMs in clinical samples.
  The number of implanted the cardiovascular implantable electronic device(s) (CIED(s))--pacemakers (PM) and implantable cardioverters defibrillators (ICD)--increases each year. The number of CIED(s) exchange procedures as well as changes in models of stimulation (upgrade to dual chamber pacemakers or three chamber cardiac resynchronization therapy devices) also grows. Also increases the inactive electrode left in the cardiovascular system. The risk of infection is higher during the exchange of devices than with their implantation. Treatments for patients with multiple electrode systems are becoming a potential source of infection. The incidence of damage defibrillator is greater than pacemaker leads. Intracardiac electrodes causes the growth of connective tissue, fibrosis in the venous system and may cause obstruction subclavian vein or brachiocephalic preventing implantation needed a new electrode. Damaged and broken electrodes may migrate to the cavities of the heart. This increases the risk of thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, tricuspid valve dysfunction and serious arrhythmias. All these facts presented lead to the conclusion that the growing need to remove the electrodes (both infected and inactive) pacemaker or cardioverter defibrillator. There are two classes of indications to remove the electrodes. Procedures for removing the benefits must outweigh the risks. Should be considered for each patient individually and take into account the experience of the operator and its results. Class I indications are: lead dependent endocarditis, sepsis, arrhythmias or embolism secondary to the presence of lead, venous occlusion prevents the implantation of new electrodes, interference between the electrodes, an implantable device infection box. Class II includes: chronic pain in the area and inactive pacemaker electrodes in young people. After removal must be individually examined whether there is a need to implant the new layout. It should not be implanted in a place that has previously been infected. The preferred area is the opposite, iliac vein, reaching epicardial implantation.
  Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a chronic autoimmune disorder characterized by progressive fibrosis of the skin and visceral tissues as well as a noninflammatory vasculopathy. Vascular disease in systemic sclerosis is a major cause of morbidity and mortality among nonpregnant patients with SSc and is even a bigger concern in the pregnant SSc patient, as the underlying vasculopathy may prevent the required hemodynamic changes necessary to support a growing pregnancy. Vascular manifestations including scleroderma renal crisis and pulmonary arterial hypertension should be considered relative contraindications against pregnancy due to the high associations of both maternal and fetal morbidity and mortality. In contrast, Raynaud's phenomenon may actually improve somewhat during pregnancy. Women with SSc who are considering a pregnancy or discover they are pregnant require evaluation for the presence and extent of underlying vasculopathy. In the absence of significant visceral vasculopathy, most women with SSc can expect to have reasonable pregnancy outcomes.
  PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The aim is to provide a detailed review of recent publications on cystic fibrosis-related diabetes (CFRD) with a particular focus on the interplay between cystic fibrosis (CF) lung disease and diabetes. RECENT FINDINGS: CFRD is a form of diabetes that is distinct from type 1 or type 2 diabetes. CFRD remains very common and increases in prevalence with increasing age so that one in two middle-aged CF persons have CFRD. People with CFRD have lower lung function, worse nutrition, more frequent hospitalization, and worse mortality than CF people without diabetes. The excess mortality previously noted in women with CFRD compared with CF women without diabetes or CF men is much less apparent. CFRD is due to insulin deficiency and peripheral insulin resistance is much less a factor. Genetic susceptibility and oxidant stress are key risk factors for developing CFRD. The lung is the prime end organ target in CFRD and mortality is due to respiratory failure, not vascular complications. Insulin is the mainstay of therapy and early recognition and institution of therapy appear to improve health outcomes. SUMMARY: CFRD remains one of the most important co-morbidities in CF. Early recognition of the disease and therapeutic intervention may diminish the negative impact that diabetes has on lung health in CF. Although a clearer understanding of the role of oxidant stress and genetics in the pathogenesis of CFRD is being elucidated, much needs to be learned before more targeted, specific therapies can be developed for this distinct form of diabetes.
  Autoimmune pancreatitis (AIP) is recognized as a distinct clinical entity, identified as a chronic inflammatory process of the pancreas in which the autoimmune mechanism is involved. Clinically and histologically, AIP has two subsets: type 1--lymphoplasmatic sclerosing pancreatitis with abundant infiltration of the pancreas and other affected organs with immunoglobulin G4-positive plasma cells, and type 2--duct centric fibrosis, characterized by granulocyte epithelial lesions in the pancreas without systemic involvement. In the diagnosis of AIP, two diagnostic criterions are used--the HISORt criteria and Asian Diagnostic Criteria. In the differential diagnosis, the pancreatic cancer must be excluded by endosonographically guided pancreatic biopsy. Typical signs of AIP are concomitant disorders in other organs (kidney, liver, biliary tract, salivary glands, colon, retroperitoneum, prostate). Novel clinicopathological entity was proposed as an 'IgG4-related sclerosing disease' (IgG4-RSC). Extensive IgG4-positive plasma cells and T lymphocyte infiltration is a common characteristics of this disease. Recently, IgG4-RSC syndrome was extended to a new entity, characterized by IgG4 hypergammaglobulinemia and IgG4-positive plasma cell infiltration, this being considered an expression of a lymphoproliferative disease, 'IgG4-positive multiorgan lymphoproliferative syndrome'. This syndrome includes Mikulicz's disease, mediastinal fibrosis, autoimmune hypophysitis, and inflammatory pseudotumor--lung, liver, breast. In the therapy of AIP, steroids constitute first-choice treatment. High response to the corticosteroid therapy is an important diagnostic criterion. In the literature, there are no case-control studies that determine if AIP predisposes to pancreatic cancer. Undoubtedly, AIP is currently a hot topic in pancreatology.
  INTRODUCTION: The objective of the present study was to examine the association of baseline demographic and clinical characteristics with sequentially obtained measurements of forced vital capacity (FVC), expressed as a percentage of the predicted value, and to identify predictors of the decline rate in FVC over time in the Genetics versus Environment in Scleroderma Outcome Study (GENISOS). METHODS: To date, 266 patients have been enrolled in GENISOS, a prospective, observational cohort of patients with early systemic sclerosis. In addition to pulmonary function tests (PFTs), clinical and laboratory data were obtained from each patient. We analyzed 926 FVC measurements utilizing generalized linear mixed models. The predictive significance of baseline variables for the decline rate in FVC was investigated by the interaction term between the variable and the follow-up time within the first 3 years after enrollment as well as throughout the entire follow-up time. RESULTS: The cohort consisted of 125 white, 54 African American, and 77 Hispanic patients with average disease duration of 2.5 years at enrollment. The mean follow-up time was 3.8 years, ranging up to 11.4 years. A number of baseline variables, including antibody status, African American ethnicity, disease type, baseline PFT values, modified Rodnan Skin Score, fibrosis on chest radiograph, and lung and skin subscores of the Severity Index, were associated with serially measured FVC levels. However, only the presence of anti-topoisomerase I antibodies (ATA) was associated with lower FVC levels (P < 0.001) as well as accelerated decline rate in FVC within the first 3 years of follow-up (P = 0.02). None of the baseline variables predicted the rate of decline in FVC on long-term follow-up. Patients with rapidly progressive ILD, however, were under-represented in the long-term follow-up group because the accelerated rate of decline in FVC was associated with poor survival (P = 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Presence of ATA was the only baseline variable associated with differential FVC levels, predicting the rate of decline in FVC within the first 3 years of follow-up. The association of faster decline in FVC with poor survival further emphasizes the need for identification of predictive biomarkers by collection of genetic information and serial blood samples in cohort studies.
  Importance of the field: Cystic fibrosis (CF), one of the major respiratory diseases, is caused by mutations in a gene encoding for a chloride channel. Abnormal transepithelial ion transport leads to a reduced volume of the airway surface liquid layer and reduced mucociliary clearance. Areas covered in this review: There is currently no cure for CF and CF lung disease remains a major contributor to morbidity and mortality. However, most current treatments for CF lung disease do not address the underlying pathology. We describe here new therapeutic developments aiming to identify or generate compounds that counteract the effects of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) on the airway. What the reader will gain: This review summarizes the current state of new developments in the treatment of CF lung disease. These drugs include nebulized and inhaled osmotically active agents, but also modifiers of ion channels other than CFTR, such as activators of alternative chloride channels or inhibitors of sodium absorption, and compounds in development aim to correct or improve impaired CFTR function directly. First clinical trials with new drugs including ion channel modifiers and CFTR pharmacotherapeutics have revealed very promising results. Take home message: CF drug therapy is moving rapidly from symptomatic therapy to treatment of the underlying pathophysiology.
  Purpose. We sought to examine the employment experiences in a population of adolescents and young adults with cystic fibrosis (CF). Methods. We administered a cross-sectional survey to 68 individuals with CF, ages 16-25 years, assessing current employment experiences and perceptions of the impact of CF on these experiences. Results. Forty-six percent of respondents reported working < 20 h per week. Sixty-seven percent reported disclosing their diagnosis to their employer. Only one respondent reported receiving formal job guidance in CF clinic, and only 16% reported that a clinician had discussed job-related issues with them. Only 21% reported that they completed CF therapies at work. Older respondents (ages 22-25 years) and those with a lower lung function were more likely to agree that 'balancing employment and CF care is stressful.' Conclusions. The majority of adolescents and young adults with CF report disclosing their diagnosis at work. Most do not feel that working interferes with routine CF therapies. Very few have received any formal career guidance. Age and lung disease severity are associated with increased concerns about balancing CF care and employment.
  Trans-plasma membrane electron transport (t-PMET) has been established since the 1960s, but it has only been subject to more intensive research in the last decade. The discovery and characterization at the molecular level of its novel components has increased our understanding of how t-PMET regulates distinct cellular functions. This review will give an update on t-PMET, with particular emphasis on how its malfunction relates to some diseases, such as cancer, abnormal cell death, cardiovascular diseases, aging, obesity, neurodegenerative diseases, pulmonary fibrosis, asthma and genetically linked pathologies. Understanding these relationships may provide novel therapeutic approaches for pathologies associated with unbalanced redox state.
  Increased work of breathing is considered to be a limiting factor in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) performing aerobic exercise. We hypothesized that adolescents with CF and with static hyperinflation are more prone to a ventilatorily limited exercise capacity than non-static hyperinflated adolescents with CF.Exercise data of 119 adolescents with CF [range 12-18 years], stratified for static hyperinflation, defined as ratio of residual volume to total lung capacity (RV/TLC) > 30%, were obtained during a progressive bicycle ergometer test with gas analysis and analyzed for ventilatory limitation.Static hyperinflation showed a significant, though weak association (Phi 0.38; P < 0.001) with a ventilatorily limited exercise capacity (breathing reserve index at maximal effort >0.70; FEV(1) < 80% predicted and reduced exercise capacity, defined as VO(2peak) < 85% predicted). Analysis of association for increasing degrees of hyperinflation showed an increase to Phi 0.49 (P < 0.001) for RV/TLC > 50%. In adolescents with static hyperinflation, peak work rate (W(peak); 3.1 +/- 0.7 W/kg (75.1 +/- 17.3% of predicted), peak oxygen uptake (VO(2peak)/kg (ml/min/kg); 39.2 +/- 9.2 ml/min/kg (91.0 +/- 20.3% of predicted), peak heart rate (HR(peak); 176 +/- 19 beats/min) were significantly (P < 0.05) decreased when compared with non-static hyperinflated adolescents (W(peak) 3.5 +/- 0.5 W/kg (81.4 +/- 10.0% of predicted)); VO(2peak)/kg (ml/min/kg); 43.1 +/- 7.5 ml/min/kg (98.0 +/- 15.1% of predicted); and HR(peak) 185 +/- 14 beats/min). Additionally, no difference was found in the degree of association of FEV(1) (%) and RV/TLC (%) with VO(2peak)/kg(pred) and W(peak)/kg(Pred), but we found the RV/TLC (%) to be a slightly stronger predictor of VO(2peak)/kg(pred) and W(peak)/kg(Pred) than FEV(1) (%).These results indicate that the presence of static hyperinflation in adolescents with CF by itself does not strongly influence ventilatory constraints during exercise and that static hyperinflation is only a slightly stronger predictor of W(peak)/kg(Pred) and VO(2peak)/kg(Pred) than airflow obstruction (FEV(1) (%)). Pediatr. Pulmonol. (c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
  Inadequate intake and suboptimal growth are common problems for patients with CF and a critical target for intervention. The purpose of this study was to compare the growth outcomes of children with CF who participated in a randomized clinical trial to improve energy intake and weight to children with CF receiving standard of care during the same time period. Our primary outcome was change in body mass index z-score (BMI z-score) over 2 years. An exploratory outcome was forced expiratory volume at 1-sec (FEV(1)) over 2 years. Participants were children ages 4-12 with CF, who participated in a randomized clinical trial of behavior plus nutrition intervention versus nutrition education alone, and a matched Comparison Sample receiving standard of care drawn from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (CFF) Registry. Children in the Clinical Trial Group (N = 67) participated in a 9-week, nutrition intervention and were followed at regular intervals (3, 6, 12, 18, and 24 months) for 2 years post-treatment to obtain anthropometric and pulmonary function data. For each child in the Comparison Sample (N = 346), these measures were obtained from the CFF Registry at matching intervals for the 27-month period corresponding to the clinical trial. Over 27 months, children in the Clinical Trial Group (the combined sample of the behavior plus nutrition and the nutrition alone) demonstrated significantly less decline in BMI z-score, -0.05 (SD = 0.68, CI = -0.23 to 0.13), as compared to children in the Comparison Sample, -0.21 (SD = 0.67, CI = -0.31 to -0.11). No statistically significant differences were found for decline in FEV(1) between children in the Clinical Trial Group and the Comparison Sample. The key implication of these findings is that intensive behavioral and nutritional intervention is effective and needs to be adapted so that it can be broadly disseminated into clinical practice. Pediatr. Pulmonol. (c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
  BACKGROUND: Pauci-immune vasculitis is a heterogeneous disorder with an unfavourable prognosis. Renal involvement is frequently observed in antineutrophil cytoplasm autoantibody (ANCA)-associated small-vessel vasculitis and is an important cause of end-stage renal disease (ESRD). Renal replacement therapy (RRT) is frequently required. Although better prognosis under dialysis is well known, the long-term follow-up of pauci-immune renal vasculitis with RRT is rarely reported. METHODS: We described 24 patients with pauci-immune vasculitis and requirement of dialysis who were admitted in our institutions from January 1989 to December 2008. Mean age was 65 +/- 12 years at the beginning of dialysis. There were 12 males and 12 females. Patients with Wegener's granulomatosis, Churg-Strauss syndrome or evidence of anti-glomerular basement membrane were excluded. The study group was formed by patients with a diagnosis of necrotizing extracapillary glomerulonephritis and microscopic polyangiitis. RESULTS: The distribution according to ANCAs was 14 p-ANCA (58%), 5 c-ANCA (21%) and 5 ANCA-negative (21%) pauci-immune renal vasculitis. Pulmonary renal syndrome (PRS) was observed in 10 patients at the onset of vasculitis. Corticosteroids and daily cyclophosphamide were administered to 18 patients, and one patient had intravenous cyclophosphamide. Five patients received isolated corticosteroid therapy. Early reduction in cyclophosphamide dosage was required in five patients due to leucopaenia. Mean follow-up after first dialysis was 89 +/- 66 months (range 2-208). Twenty patients were included in haemodialysis (HD), and four patients were included in peritoneal dialysis (PD). At the end of the study, nine patients had received a cadaveric kidney transplant (KT). Relapses rate after the onset of dialysis was 0.03 episode/patient/year. PRS-associated relapses after beginning dialysis were observed in four patients. Main therapy in relapses was also corticosteroids and cyclophosphamide. Survival rates for year 1, 2 and 5 was 91%, 91% and 85%, respectively. Overall mortality at the end of the study was 31.8%. Five patients died in the PRS group, but only one death was associated with progressive pulmonary fibrosis. Higher mortality was observed in PRS vasculitis present at the onset of RRT (50% vs 16.7%, P = NS). Better outcome in patients who received a renal transplantation was observed (88.8% vs 53.8%, P = NS). Conclusions. Despite a low number of patients in this series, pauci-immune vasculitis prognosis under dialysis seems equal to other causes of chronic kidney disease. This study observed a low rate of relapses after beginning dialysis. Poor prognosis is related to severe complications at the beginning of RRT. Today, kidney transplantation is an important therapeutic option for these patients.
  BACKGROUND: Pre-operative infection with organisms from the Burkholderia cepacia complex (BCC), particularly B cenocepacia, has been linked with a poorer prognosis after transplantation compared to patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) without this infection. Therefore, many transplant centers do not list these patients for transplantation. METHODS: We report the early and long-term results of a cohort of lung transplant recipients with CF and pre-operative BCC infection. Patients with pre-transplantation BCC infection were identified by case-note review. BCC species status was assigned by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based techniques. Survival rates were compared to recipients with CF without BCC infection. Survival rates in BCC subgroups were also compared, and then further analyzed pre- and post-2001, when a new immunosuppressive and antibiotic regime was introduced for such patients. RESULTS: Two hundred sixteen patients with CF underwent lung transplantation and 22 had confirmed pre-operative BCC infection, with 12 of these being B cenocepacia. Nine B cenocepacia-infected recipients died within the first year, and in 8 BCC sepsis was considered to be the cause of death. Despite instituting a tailored peri-operative immunosuppressive and microbiologic care approach for such patients, post-transplantation BCC septic deaths occurred frequently in those with pre-transplantation B cenocepacia infection. In contrast, recipients infected with other BCC species had significantly better outcomes, with post-transplantation survival comparable to other recipients with CF. CONCLUSIONS: Mortality in patients with B cenocepacia infection was unacceptably high and has led to our center no longer accepting patients with this condition onto the lung transplant waiting list. Long-term survival in the non-B cenocepacia BCC group was excellent, without high rates of acute rejection or bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome (BOS) longer term, and these patients continue to be considered for lung transplantation.
  BACKGROUND: Pirfenidone (PFD) is a molecule that exhibits antifibrotic properties in a variety of in vitro and animal models of lung, liver and renal fibrosis. These pathologies share many fibrogenic pathways with an abnormal fibrous wound-healing process; consequently, tissue repair and tissue regeneration-regulating mechanisms are altered. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the usefulness of PFD as an antifibrotic agent in clinical and experimental models of fibrotic disease. CONCLUSIONS: There is a growing understanding of the molecular effects of PFD on the wound healing mechanism, leading to novel approaches for the management of fibrosis in lung, liver and renal tissues. Although the optimum treatment for fibrosis remains undefined, it is possible that combined therapeutic regimens that include this wide-application molecule, pirfenidone, could offer a useful treatment for fibrotic disease.
  MRI for AF Patient Selection and Ablation Approach. Introduction: Left atrial (LA) fibrosis and ablation related scarring are major predictors of success in rhythm control of atrial fibrillation (AF). We used delayed enhancement MRI (DE-MRI) to stratify AF patients based on pre-ablation fibrosis and also to evaluate ablation-induced scarring in order to identify predictors of a successful ablation. Methods and Results: One hundred and forty-four patients were staged by percent of fibrosis quantified with DE-MRI, relative to the LA wall volume: minimal or Utah stage 1; <5%, mild or Utah stage 2; 5-20%, moderate or Utah stage 3; 20-35%, and extensive or Utah stage 4; >35%. All patients underwent pulmonary vein (PV) isolation and posterior wall and septal debulking. Overall, LA scarring was quantified and PV antra were evaluated for circumferential scarring 3 months post ablation. LA scarring post ablation was comparable across the 4 stages. Most patients had either no (36.8%) or 1 PV (32.6%) antrum circumferentially scarred. Forty-two patients (29%) had recurrent AF over 283 +/- 167 days. No recurrences were noted in Utah stage 1. Recurrence was 28% in Utah stage 2, 35% in Utah stage 3, and 56% in Utah stage 4. Recurrence was predicted by circumferential PV scarring in Utah stage 2 and by overall LA wall scarring in Utah stage 3. No recurrence predictors were identified in Utah stage 4. Conclusions: Circumferential PV antral scarring predicts ablation success in mild LA fibrosis, while posterior wall and septal scarring is needed for moderate fibrosis. This may help select the proper candidate and strategy in catheter ablation of AF. (J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol, Vol. pp. 1-7).
  BACKGROUND: Pulmonary fibrosis (PF), cystic fibrosis (CF) and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) often cause chronic respiratory failure (CRF). METHODS: In order to investigate if there are different patterns of adaptation of the ventilatory pump in CRF, in three groups of lung transplant candidates with PF (n=9, forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1))=37+/-3% predicted, forced vital capacity (FVC)=32+/-2% predicted), CF (n=9, FEV(1)=22+/-3% predicted, FVC=30+/-3% predicted) and COPD (n=21, FEV(1)=21+/-1% predicted, FVC=46+/-2% predicted), 10 healthy controls and 16 transplanted patients, total and compartmental chest wall volumes were measured by opto-electronic plethysmography during rest and exercise. RESULTS: Three different breathing patterns were found during CRF in PF, CF and COPD. Patients with COPD were characterised by a reduced duty cycle at rest and maximal exercise (34+/-1%, p<0.001), while patients with PF and CF showed an increased breathing frequency (49+/-6 and 34+/-2/min, respectively) and decreased tidal volume (0.75+/-0.10 and 0.79+/-0.07 litres) (p<0.05). During exercise, end-expiratory chest wall and rib cage volumes increased significantly in patients with COPD and CF but not in those with PF. End-inspiratory volumes did not increase in CF and PF. The breathing pattern of transplanted patients was similar to that of healthy controls. CONCLUSIONS: There are three distinct patterns of CRF in patients with PF, CF and COPD adopted by the ventilatory pump to cope with the underlying lung disease that may explain why patients with PF and CF are prone to respiratory failure earlier than patients with COPD. After lung transplantation the chronic adaptations of the ventilatory pattern to advanced lung diseases are reversible and indicate that the main contributing factor is the lung itself rather than systemic effects of the disease.
  BACKGROUND: Osteopontin (OPN) is a glycoprotein that has been associated with inflammation and fibrosis. Severe refractory asthma (SRA) is characterised by an intense inflammatory and remodelling process. The aim of this study was to investigate the levels of OPN in sputum supernatants of patients with SRA, to compare them with milder forms of the disease and to investigate their possible association with mediators and cells involved in the inflammatory and remodelling process. METHODS: 33 patients with SRA, 29 with moderate asthma, 21 with steroid-naïve asthma and 20 healthy subjects were studied. All subjects underwent lung function tests, bronchial hyper-responsiveness assessment and sputum induction for cell count identification and measurement of OPN, vascular endothelial growth factor, transforming growth factor beta1 (TGF-beta1), cysteinyl leukotrienes, interleukin 13 (IL-13), eosinophilic cationic protein (ECP) and IL-8 in sputum supernatants. RESULTS: Median (IQR) OPN levels (pg/ml) were significantly higher in patients with SRA than in those with moderate asthma, steroid-naive asthma and healthy control subjects (1840 (1125-11000) vs 130 (100-210) vs 100 (67-130) vs 50 (42-70), respectively, p<0.001). Regression analysis showed a significant association between log OPN and sputum eosinophils, cysteinyl leukotrienes, IL-13, TGF-beta1 and ECP. TGF-beta1 represented the strongest association with OPN. The above associations were not observed in milder forms of the disease or in healthy subjects. CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that OPN levels are higher in SRA than in less severe forms of the disease. Moreover, OPN is associated with mediators involved in both the inflammatory and remodelling process such as TGF-beta1, IL-13 and cysteinyl leukotrienes only in SRA.
  BACKGROUND: Pathological angiogenesis contributes to various ocular, malignant, and inflammatory disorders, emphasizing the need to understand this process more precisely on a molecular level. Previously we found that CIB1, a 22 kDa regulatory protein, plays a critical role in endothelial cell function, angiogenic growth factor-mediated cellular functions, PAK1 activation, MMP-2 expression, and in vivo ischemia-induced angiogenesis. Since pathological angiogenesis is highly dependent on many of these same processes, we hypothesized that CIB1 may also regulate tumor-induced angiogenesis. METHODS: To test this hypothesis, we allografted either murine B16 melanoma or Lewis lung carcinoma cells into WT and CIB1-KO mice, and monitored tumor growth, morphology, histology, and intra-tumoral microvessel density. RESULTS: Allografted melanoma tumors that developed in CIB1-KO mice were smaller in volume, had a distinct necrotic appearance, and had significantly less intra-tumoral microvessel density. Similarly, allografted Lewis lung carcinoma tumors in CIB1-KO mice were smaller in volume and mass, and appeared to have decreased perfusion. Intra-tumoral hemorrhage, necrosis, and perivascular fibrosis were also increased in tumors that developed in CIB1-KO mice. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that, in addition to its other functions, CIB1 plays a critical role in facilitating tumor growth and tumor-induced angiogenesis.
  The study was concerned with identifying toxic effect of certain methods of radiotherapy of metastatic lesions of the lung. Leukocyte index intoxication (Kalf-Kalif), paramecin test and mean molecule level determination were used. The worst endogenous intoxication was found to be caused by irradiating four consecutive fields of the mediastinum. The least damage was caused in combination with artificial pneumothorax. Use of smaller-size fields of irradiation was followed by a significant drop in adverse side-effects.
  An analysis of results and treatment outcomes of 178 patients has been made. The patients were examined 1, 3, 6, 12, 24 months after discharge from hospital. The parameters characterizing residual cavities, pneumofibrosis, pleural fibrosis and changes in the bronchial tree were analyzed. Recovery was noted in 172 patients (96.63%). According to CT scan data positive dynamics in the reparative processes in the lungs and pleural cavity could be seen. No relapses of the purulent processes and development of lung cirrhosis were noted.
  An eroded atheromatous aorta may be a source of cholesterol crystal embolism(CCE). Embolization of atheromatous material accounts for obstruction of distal arterioles around which a foreign-body giant cell granuloma inflammatory reaction develops. The diagnosis is often delayed or un recognized because of varying or misleading clinical signs, such as renal insufficiency, digestive or neurological symptoms, or both or unexplained multiple-system disease. Although CCE can occur spontaneously, it has been increasingly recognized as an iatrogenic complication from an invasive vascular procedure, such as manipulation of the aorta during angiography or vascular surgery. It has also been reported to occur following anticoagulant therapy or thrombolysis. Patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) often experience a combination of these factors: anticoagulation, intra-arterial angiographic procedures and intraoperative aortic cross-clamping. These multiple factors could account for the acute and severe postoperative clinical and biological findings observed in the case reported here. A 65-year-old Saudi man was admitted to our hospital on July 9, 2008 due to chest pain at rest. He had suffered from type 2 diabetes mellitus on Oral hypoglycemics, hypertension on treatment, impaired renal functions and hypercholesterolemia, he was an ex-smoker with history of diagnosed pulmonary interstitial fibrosis. He had Coronary angiography in another hospital on May 2008 showing a left main lesion 60%, Left anterior descending lesion 90%, circumflex lesion 80% and Right coronary lesion 70%, three weeks later an acute on top of chronic deterioration in renal chemistry was observed for which conservative treatment was chosen.
  INTRODUCTION: Bacterial colonization of the lungs is the main cause of morbidity in cystic fibrosis (CF). Pathogens such as Staphylococcus aureus are very well adapted to the pulmonary environment and may persist for years in the same patient. Genetic determinants of these bacteria, such as the presence of SCCmec have recently emerged as a problem in this population of patients. METHODS: Staphylococcus aureus isolates obtained from different clinical materials coming from CF and non-CF patients attended at a cystic fibrosis reference hospital were compared according to SCCmec type and antibiotic susceptibility profile. RESULTS: Three hundred and sixty-four single-patient Staphylococcus aureus isolates were collected, of which 164 (45%) were from CF patients. Among the latter, 57/164 (44.5%) were MRSA, and among the non-CF patients, 89/200 (35%) were MRSA. Associated pathogens were found in 38 CF patients. All 57 MRSA from CF patients harbored the multiresistant cassette type III. In contrast, 31/89 MRSA from non-CF patients harbored SCCmec type I (35%) and 44/89 harbored type III (49%). The antibiotic susceptibility pattern was similar between CF and non-CF patients. CONCLUSIONS: The high prevalence of multiresistant SCCmec type III among CF patients compared with non-CF patients in our institution may make it difficult to control disease progression through antibiotic therapy for promoting the survival of this kind of patient.
  Our previous studies proved that myofibrillogenesis regulator-1 (MR-1) has a close relationship with cardiac hypertrophy induced by angiotensin (Ang) II. Here in the present study, we developed a recombinant adenoviral vector (AdSiR-MR-1) driving small interfering (si)RNA against MR-1 to evaluate its effect on cardiac hypertrophy in vivo. Cardiac hypertrophy was induced by chronic Ang II infusion in the mice; AdSiR-MR-1 was administered via the jugular vein through one bolus injection. Thirteen days after injection, the viral DNA was still detectable in the heart, validating the efficiency of gene transfer. The expression levels of MR-1 mRNA and protein were increased by 2.5-fold in the heart after Ang II infusion; AdSiR-control, which contains a scrambled siRNA sequence, had no effect on them. AdSiR-MR-1 treatment abolished the up-regulation of MR-1 induced by Ang II. The silencing effect of AdSiR-MR-1 was observed in many other tissues such as the liver, lung, and kidney, except skeletal muscle. Ang II-induced cardiac hypertrophy was suppressed in mice treated with AdSiR-MR-1, as determined by echocardiography. Morphological and immnohistochemical examinations revealed that interstitial cardiac fibrosis as well as infiltrating inflammatory cells was increased after Ang II infusion, AdSiR-MR-1 ameliorates these disorders greatly. In Ang II-infused mice, MR-1 silencing also blocked the up-regulation of other genes related to cardiac hypertrophy or metabolism of the extracellular matrix. In summary, our results demonstrate the feasibility of MR-1 silencing in vivo and suggest that MR-1 could be a potential new target to treat cardiac hypertrophy induced by Ang II.
  A balance sheet describing the integrated homeostasis of secretion, absorption, and surface movement of liquids on pulmonary surfaces has remained elusive. It remains unclear whether the alveolus exhibits an intra-alveolar ion/liquid transport physiology or whether it secretes ions/liquid that may communicate with airway surfaces. Studies employing isolated human AT2 cells were utilized to investigate this question. Human AT2 cells exhibited both epithelial Na+ channel (ENaC)-mediated Na+ absorption and cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR)-mediated Cl- secretion, both significantly regulated by extracellular nucleotides. In addition, we observed in normal AT2 cells an absence of CFTR regulation of ENaC activity and an absence of expression/activity of reported calcium-activated chloride channels (TMEM16A, Bestrophin-1, ClC2, and SLC26A9), both features strikingly different from normal airway epithelial cells. Measurements of alveolar surface liquid (AvSL) volume revealed that normal AT2 cells: 1) achieved an extracellular nucleotide concentration-dependent steady-state alveolar surface liquid (AvSL) height of approximately 4 um in vitro; 2) absorbed liquid when the lumen was flooded; and 3) secreted liquid when treated with uridine 5 triphosphate (UTP), forskolin, or subjected to cyclic compressive stresses mimicking tidal breathing. Collectively, our studies suggest that human AT2 cells in vitro have the capacity to absorb or secrete liquid in response to local alveolar conditions.
  Cell-based therapies with embryonic or adult stem cells, including induced pluripotent stem cells, have emerged as potential novel approaches for several devastating and otherwise incurable lung diseases, including emphysema, pulmonary fibrosis, pulmonary hypertension, and the acute respiratory distress syndrome. Although initial studies suggested engraftment of exogenously administered stem cells in lung, this is now generally felt to be a rare occurrence of uncertain physiologic significance. However, more recent studies have demonstrated paracrine effects of administered cells, including stimulation of angiogenesis and modulation of local inflammatory and immune responses in mouse lung disease models. Based on these studies and on safety and initial efficacy data from trials of adult stem cells in other diseases, groundbreaking clinical trials of cell-based therapy have been initiated for pulmonary hypertension and for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. In parallel, the identity and role of endogenous lung progenitor cells in development and in repair from injury and potential contribution as lung cancer stem cells continue to be elucidated. Most recently, novel bioengineering approaches have been applied to develop functional lung tissue ex vivo. Advances in each of these areas will be described in this review with particular reference to animal models.
  Evidence of immune stimulation has been noted in opiate dependent patients for many decades. Documented changes have included lymphadenopathy, round cell infiltration of the hepatic portal triads, diffuse peri-bronchitis, hyperglobulinaemia, lymphocytosis, monocytosis, systemic cytokine stimulation, and cytokine and chemokine activation within the neuraxis. A parallel literature describes an elevated list of chronic degenerative disease as common in such patients including neurodegenerative conditions, atherosclerosis, nephrosclerosis, hepatic fibrosis and cirrhosis, chronic obstructive and fibrotic lung disease, osteoporosis, chronic periodontitis, various cancers, hair greying, and stem cell suppression. All of these disorders are now known to have an important immunological role in their pathogenic pathways. The multisystem nature of these myriad changes strongly suggest that the ageing process itself is stimulated in these patients. The link between the immunostimulation on the one hand and the elevated and temporally advanced nature of the chronic degenerative diseases on the other appears not to have been made in the literature. Moreover as immunostimulation is also believed to be an important, potent and principal contributor to the ageing process it appears that experimental and studies of this putative link are warranted. Verification of such an hypothesis would also carry management implications for dose and duration of chronic pain and addiction treatment, pharmacotherapeutic selection, and novel treatments such as long term naltrexone implant therapy and heroin trials.
  BACKGROUND: Cystic fibrosis is a debilitating lung disease due to mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator protein (CFTR) and is associated with chronic infections resulting in elevated myeloperoxidase activity and generation of hypochlorous acid (HOCl). CFTR mutations lead to decreased levels of glutathione (GSH) and thiocyanate (SCN) in the epithelial lining fluid (ELF). Hypertonic saline is used to improve lung function however the mechanism is uncertain. METHODS: In the present study, the effect of GSH and SCN on HOCl-mediated cell injury and their changes in the ELF after hypertonic saline nebulization in wild type (WT) and CFTR KO mice was examined. CFTR sufficient and deficient lung cells were assessed for GSH, SCN and corresponding sensitivity towards HOCl-mediated injury, in vitro. RESULTS: CFTR (-) cells had lower extracellular levels of both GSH and SCN and were more sensitive to HOCl-mediated injury. In vivo, hypertonic saline increased ELF GSH in the WT and to a lesser extent in the CFTR KO mice but only SCN in the WT ELF. Finally, potential protective effects of GSH and SCN at concentrations found in the ELF against HOCl toxicity were examined in vitro. CONCLUSIONS: While the concentrations of GSH and SCN associated with the WT ELF protect against HOCl toxicity, those found in the CFTR KO mice were less sufficient to inhibit cell injury. These data suggests that CFTR has important roles in exporting GSH and SCN which are protective against oxidants and that hypertonic saline treatment may have beneficial effects by increasing their levels in the lung.
  Patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) experience a progressive deterioration in health leading to a shortened life expectancy with concomitant psychologic challenges that also may require intervention. Approaches to address psychologic dysfunction include insight-oriented therapy, cognitive-behavioral therapy, biofeedback, hypnosis, massage, music therapy, relaxation, and family therapy. Patients who learn to use coping strategies are more likely to adhere to treatment, which helps improve both their physical and psychologic well-being. Unique stressors arise for patients awaiting lung transplant as a result of their advanced state of disease along with their fear of death before donor lungs become available. This case report demonstrates some of the psychologic struggles faced by a 10-year-old with CF as he awaited lung transplantation, which led to a loss of hope and his request for withdrawal of care. Encouraging of the patient to express how his life might be improved yielded changes in his management that restored his hopefulness, and allowed him to survive long enough to undergo successful lung transplantation. Thus, reestablishment of hope might be studied as an additional intervention to help improve the well-being of patients who are seriously ill.
  OBJECTIVE: Children with Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) exhibit dramatically accelerated cardiovascular disease (CVD), causing death from myocardial infarction or stroke between the ages of 7 and 20 years. We undertook the first histological comparative evaluation between genetically confirmed HGPS and the CVD of aging. METHODS AND RESULTS: We present structural and immunohistological analysis of cardiovascular tissues from 2 children with HGPS who died of myocardial infarction. Both had features classically associated with the atherosclerosis of aging, as well as arteriolosclerosis of small vessels. In addition, vessels exhibited prominent adventitial fibrosis, a previously undescribed feature of HGPS. Importantly, although progerin was detected at higher rates in the HGPS coronary arteries, it was also present in non-HGPS individuals. Between the ages of 1 month and 97 years, progerin staining increased an average of 3.34% per year (P<0.0001) in coronary arteries. CONCLUSIONS: We find concordance among many aspects of cardiovascular pathology in both HGPS and geriatric patients. HGPS generates a more prominent adventitial fibrosis than typical CVD. Vascular progerin generation in young non-HGPS individuals, which significantly increases throughout life, strongly suggests that progerin has a role in the cardiovascular aging of the general population.
  AIMS: The role of nuclear factor (NF)-κB in heart failure (HF) is not well defined. We sought to determine whether myocyte-localized NF-κB p65 activation in HF exacerbates post-infarction remodelling and promotes maladaptive endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. METHODS AND RESULTS: Non-transgenic (NTg) and transgenic (Tg) mice with myocyte-restricted overexpression of a phosphorylation-resistant inhibitor of κBα (IκBα(S32A,S36A)) underwent coronary ligation (to induce HF) or sham operation. Over 4 weeks, the remote myocardium of ligated hearts exhibited robust NF-κB activation that was almost exclusively p65 beyond 24 h. Compared with sham at 4 weeks, NTg HF hearts were dilated and dysfunctional, and exhibited hypertrophy, fibrosis, up-regulation of inflammatory cytokines, increased apoptosis, down-regulation of ER protein chaperones, and up-regulation of the ER stress-activated pro-apoptotic factor CHOP. Compared with NTg HF, Tg-IκBα(S32A,S36A) HF mice exhibited: (i) improved survival, chamber remodelling, systolic function, and pulmonary congestion, (ii) markedly diminished NF-κB p65 activation, cytokine expression, and fibrosis, and (iii) a three-fold reduction in apoptosis. Moreover, Tg-IκBα(S32A,S36A) HF hearts exhibited maintained expression of ER chaperones and CHOP when compared with sham. In cardiomyocytes, NF-κB activation was required for ER stress-mediated apoptosis, whereas abrogation of myocyte NF-κB shifted the ER stress response to one of adaptation and survival. CONCLUSION: Persistent myocyte NF-κB p65 activation in HF exacerbates cardiac remodelling by imparting pro-inflammatory, pro-fibrotic, and pro-apoptotic effects. p65 modulation of cell death in HF may occur in part from NF-κB-mediated transformation of the ER stress response from one of adaptation to one of apoptosis.
  The objective of this study was to examine what kinds of cytokines are related to lung disorder by well-dispersed nanoparticles. The mass median diameter of nickel oxide in distilled water was 26 nm. Rats intratracheally received 0.2 mg of nickel oxide suspended in distilled water, and were sacrificed from three days to six months. The concentrations of 21 cytokines including inflammation, fibrosis and allergy-related ones were measured in the lung. Infiltration of alveolar macrophages was observed persistently in the nickel oxide-exposed group. Expression of macrophage inflammatory protein-1alpha showed a continued increase in lung tissue and broncho-alveolar lavage fluid (BALF) while interleukin-1alpha (IL-1alpha), IL-1beta in lung tissue and monocyte chemotactic protein-1 in BALF showed transient increases. Taken together, it was suggested that nano-agglomerates of nickel oxide nanoparticles have a persistent inflammatory effect, and the transient increase in cytokine expression and persistent increases in CC chemokine were involved in the persistent pulmonary inflammation.
  PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review summarizes recently published data on the epidemiology, pathophysiology and treatment of cystic fibrosis (CF)-related low bone mineral density (BMD). RECENT FINDINGS: A systematic literature review reports that the pooled prevalence of osteoporosis in adults with CF is 23.5% [95% confidence interval (CI) 16.6-31.0] and the pooled prevalences of radiologically confirmed vertebral and nonvertebral fractures are 14% (95% CI 7.8-21.7) and 19.7% (95% CI 6.0-38.8), respectively. Recent data suggest that the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) is expressed in bone cells and that CFTR dysfunction affects bone cell activity. The secondary effects of CFTR dysfunction also influence bone metabolism. For example, bone resorption increases during CF pulmonary exacerbations due to the stimulatory effects of proinflammatory cytokines on osteoclast activity. Bisphosphonates inhibit osteoclastic bone resorption and recent data show that both oral and intravenous bisphosphonates improve BMD in patients with CF. SUMMARY: CF-related low BMD is a common but treatable complication of CF.
  Cystic fibrosis (CF), which is caused by mutations in CFTR, affects many tissues, including the lung. Submucosal gland serous acinar cells are primary sites of fluid secretion and CFTR expression in the lung. Absence of CFTR in these cells may contribute to CF lung pathogenesis by disrupting fluid secretion. Here, we have isolated primary serous acinar cells from wild-type and CFTR-/- pigs and humans without CF to investigate the cellular mechanisms and regulation of fluid secretion by optical imaging. Porcine and human serous cells secrete fluid in response to vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) and other agents that raise intracellular cAMP levels; here, we have demonstrated that this requires CFTR and a cAMP-dependent rise in intracellular Ca2+ concentration ([Ca2+]i). Importantly, cAMP induced the release of Ca2+ from InsP3-sensitive Ca2+ stores also responsive to cAMP-independent agonists such as cholinergic, histaminergic, and purinergic agonists that stimulate CFTR-independent fluid secretion. This provides two types of synergism that strongly potentiated cAMP-mediated fluid secretion but differed in their CFTR dependencies. First, CFTR-dependent secretion was strongly potentiated by low VIP and carbachol concentrations that individually were unable to stimulate secretion. Second, higher VIP concentrations more strongly potentiated the [Ca2+]i responses, enabling ineffectual levels of cholinergic stimulation to strongly activate CFTR-independent fluid secretion. These results identify important molecular mechanisms of cAMP-dependent secretion, including a requirement for Ca2+ signaling, and suggest new therapeutic approaches to correct defective submucosal gland secretion in CF.
  Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a recessive disease that affects multiple organs. It is caused by mutations in CFTR. Animal modeling of this disease has been challenging, with species- and strain-specific differences in organ biology and CFTR function influencing the emergence of disease pathology. Here, we report the phenotype of a CFTR-knockout ferret model of CF. Neonatal CFTR-knockout ferrets demonstrated many of the characteristics of human CF disease, including defective airway chloride transport and submucosal gland fluid secretion; variably penetrant meconium ileus (MI); pancreatic, liver, and vas deferens disease; and a predisposition to lung infection in the early postnatal period. Severe malabsorption by the gastrointestinal (GI) tract was the primary cause of death in CFTR-knockout kits that escaped MI. Elevated liver function tests in CFTR-knockout kits were corrected by oral administration of ursodeoxycholic acid, and the addition of an oral proton-pump inhibitor improved weight gain and survival. To overcome the limitations imposed by the severe intestinal phenotype, we cloned 4 gut-corrected transgenic CFTR-knockout kits that expressed ferret CFTR specifically in the intestine. One clone passed feces normally and demonstrated no detectable ferret CFTR expression in the lung or liver. The animals described in this study are likely to be useful tools for dissecting CF disease pathogenesis and developing treatments.
  Cystic fibrosis (CF) is caused by defects in the CFTR, a cAMP-activated Cl- channel of epithelia. The resulting reduction in epithelial fluid transport creates abnormally viscous secretions from airway mucous glands that may be a major factor in CF pathology. Mouse airways have few mucous glands, and the mouse model of CF exhibits no significant airway disease. Pigs and ferrets, however, have approximately the same number of airway mucous glands as humans. In this issue of the JCI, three independent research groups conclude that changes in airway mucous gland function in CFTR-deficient animals of these species resemble the changes seen in human CF. It is expected, therefore, that these animals will develop lung disease similar to human CF and prove to be valuable models on which to test potential therapies.
  Fibrotic reactions in the airways of the lung or the pulmonary interstitium are a common pathologic outcome after exposure to a wide variety of toxic agents, including metals, particles or fibers. The survival of mesenchymal cells (fibroblasts and myofibroblasts) is a key factor in determining whether a fibroproliferative response that occurs after toxic injury to the lung will ultimately resolve or progress to a pathologic state. Several polypeptide growth factors, including members of the platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) family and the epidermal growth factor (EGF) family, are prosurvival factors that stimulate a replicative and migratory mesenchymal cell phenotype during the early stages of lung fibrogenesis. This replicative phenotype can progress to a matrix synthetic phenotype in the presence of transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1). The resolution of a fibrotic response requires growth arrest and apoptosis of mesenchymal cells, whereas progressive chronic fibrosis has been associated with mesenchymal cell resistance to apoptosis. Mesenchymal cell survival or apoptosis is further influenced by cytokines secreted during Th1 inflammation (e.g., IFN-γ) or Th2 inflammation (e.g., IL-13) that modulate the expression of growth factor activity through the STAT family of transcription factors. Understanding the mechanisms that regulate the survival or death of mesenchymal cells is central to ultimately developing therapeutic strategies for lung fibrosis.
  OBJECTIVES:Evidence suggests that cystic fibrosis liver disease (CFLD) does not affect mortality or morbidity in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). The importance of gender and age in outcome in CF makes selection of an appropriate comparison group central to the interpretation of any differences in mortality and morbidity in patients with CFLD.METHODS:This is a 7-year follow-up of 42 children with CFLD and their age- and sex-matched controls. Participants were reviewed clinically, biochemically, and radiologically at follow-up.RESULTS:Overall, 85% (72 of 84) of the original cohort were included, 36 CFLD participants and 36 CF controls. There was no significant difference in the number of deaths/transplants between groups (7 of 36 (19.4%) CFLD participants, 3 of 36 (8.3%) CF controls). There was a tendency for participants with CFLD to die younger than their respective CF controls. There was no difference in height, weight, body mass index, or pulmonary function between the groups. Nutritional parameters (sum skinfold thickness 31.6 vs. 42.3, P=0.03; mean upper arm fat area 15.08 vs. 10.59, P=0.001; Shwachman score 43.7 vs. 32.1, P=0.001) were worse among CFLD participants than among CF controls. Cystic fibrosis-related diabetes was more common in CFLD participants (11 of 27 (40.7%) vs. 5 of 33 (15.2%), P=0.02). Eight children (22.2%) with evidence of CFLD at baseline had no clinical evidence of liver disease as adults.CONCLUSIONS:Patients with CFLD have a more severe CF phenotype than do CF patients without liver disease. However, a subgroup of children with CFLD will not manifest clinically significant liver disease as adults.Am J Gastroenterol advance online publication, 24 August 2010; doi:10.1038/ajg.2010.316.
  Interstitial lung disease (ILD) is a challenging clinical entity associated with multiple connective tissue diseases, and is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality. Effective therapies for connective tissue disease-associated interstitial lung disease (CTD-ILD) are still lacking. Multidisciplinary clinics dedicated to the early diagnosis and improved management of patients with CTD-ILD are now being established. There is rapid progress in understanding and identifying the effector cells, the proinflammatory and profibrotic mediators, and the pathways involved in the pathogenesis of CTD-ILD. Serum biomarkers may provide new insights as risk factors for pulmonary fibrosis and as measures of disease progression. Despite these recent advances, the management of patients with CTD-ILD remains suboptimal. Further studies are therefore urgently needed to better understand these conditions, and to develop effective therapeutic interventions.
  Over the last two decades, enormous effort has focused on developing viral-based gene delivery vectors to target the respiratory airway epithelium as a potential treatment for cystic fibrosis (CF) lung disease. However, amongst other problems, the efficiency of gene delivery to the differentiated airway epithelial cells of the lung has been too low for clinical benefit. Although not a target for CF therapy, the nasal epithelium exhibits similar cellular morphology and composition of that of the lower airways, thus representing an accessible and relevant tissue target for evaluating novel and improved gene delivery vectors. We previously reported that replication-competent human parainfluenza virus-based (PIV) vectors efficiently deliver the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene to sufficient numbers of cultured CF airway epithelial cells to completely correct the bioelectric function of CF cells to normal levels resulting in restoration of mucus transport. Here, using an in vitro model of rhesus airway epithelium, we demonstrate that PIV mediates efficient gene transfer in rhesus epithelium as in the human counterpart. Naïve rhesus macaques were inoculated intranasally with a PIV vector expressing rhesus macaque -fetoprotein (rhAFP), and expression monitored longitudinally. RhAFP was detected in nasal lavage fluid and in serum samples, indicating that PIV-mediated gene transfer was effective and that rhAFP was secreted into both mucosal and serosal compartments. Although expression was transient, lasting up to 10 days, it paralleled virus replication suggesting that as PIV was cleared then rhAFP expression was lost. No adverse reactions or signs of discomfort were noted, and only mild, transient elevations of a small number of inflammatory cytokines were measured at the peak of virus replication. In sum, rhAFP proved suitable for monitoring in vivo gene delivery over time, and PIV vectors appear to be promising airway-specific gene transfer vehicles that warrant further development.
  The available evidence for long-term, low-dose treatment with 14- and 15-membered ring macrolides in non-cystic fibrosis (CF) bronchiectasis, COPD, chronic sinusitis, and asthma is reviewed with special attention to possible adverse effects and the emergence of resistance during long-term macrolide treatment. Macrolide maintenance therapy has been proven to be of benefit in diffuse panbronchiolitis and CF, presumably due to an anti-inflammatory mechanism of action in addition to its direct antimicrobial effect. Solid evidence to justify this treatment regimen for non-CF bronchiectasis, asthma, or sinusitis is still lacking, although a beneficial effect of long-term macrolide therapy has been found in small clinical trials on these subjects. Data from randomized trials of long-term macrolide treatment in COPD are conflicting. A sufficiently long duration of treatment and the careful selection of patients appears to be crucial. Aside from its beneficial effects, possible side effects of macrolide treatment should be taken into account, the most important of these being gastrointestinal upset and cardiac arrhythmias. Development of macrolide resistance among respiratory pathogens is very common during long-term macrolide treatment. Whether this finding is clinically significant is a matter of debate.
  Tissue stiffening is a hallmark of fibrotic disorders but has traditionally been regarded as an outcome of fibrosis, not a contributing factor to pathogenesis. In this study, we show that fibrosis induced by bleomycin injury in the murine lung locally increases median tissue stiffness sixfold relative to normal lung parenchyma. Across this pathophysiological stiffness range, cultured lung fibroblasts transition from a surprisingly quiescent state to progressive increases in proliferation and matrix synthesis, accompanied by coordinated decreases in matrix proteolytic gene expression. Increasing matrix stiffness strongly suppresses fibroblast expression of COX-2 (cyclooxygenase-2) and synthesis of prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)), an autocrine inhibitor of fibrogenesis. Exogenous PGE(2) or an agonist of the prostanoid EP2 receptor completely counteracts the proliferative and matrix synthetic effects caused by increased stiffness. Together, these results demonstrate a dominant role for normal tissue compliance, acting in part through autocrine PGE(2), in maintaining fibroblast quiescence and reveal a feedback relationship between matrix stiffening, COX-2 suppression, and fibroblast activation that promotes and amplifies progressive fibrosis.
  Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a genetic disease caused by recessive mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene and is associated with prevalent and chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa lung infections. Despite numerous studies that have sought to elucidate the role of CFTR in the innate immune response, the links between CFTR, innate immunity, and P. aeruginosa infection remain unclear. The present work highlights the zebrafish as a powerful model organism for human infectious disease, particularly infection by P. aeruginosa. Zebrafish embryos with reduced expression of the cftr gene (Cftr morphants) exhibited reduced respiratory burst response and directed neutrophil migration, supporting a connection between cftr and the innate immune response. Cftr morphants were infected with P. aeruginosa or other bacterial species that are commonly associated with infections in CF patients, including Burkholderia cenocepacia, Haemophilus influenzae, and Staphylococcus aureus. Intriguingly, the bacterial burden of P. aeruginosa was found to be significantly higher in zebrafish Cftr morphants than in controls, but this phenomenon was not observed with the other bacterial species. Bacterial burden in Cftr morphants infected with a P. aeruginosa DeltaLasR mutant, a quorum sensing-deficient strain, was comparable to that in control fish indicating that the regulation of virulence factors through LasR is required for enhancement of infection in the absence of Cftr. The zebrafish system provides a multitude of advantages for studying the pathogenesis of P. aeruginosa and for understanding the role that innate immune cells such as neutrophils play in the host response to acute bacterial infections commonly associated with cystic fibrosis.
  OBJECTIVE: Fibroproliferative diseases are common causes of morbidity and mortality. Interleukin-15 (IL-15) is a pleiotropic cytokine with multiple effects on cells of the immune system. Although IL-15 is also expressed in mesenchymal cells, its effects on the development of fibrosis are unknown. We have previously described an association between serum IL-15 levels and the extent of pulmonary fibrosis in the connective tissue disease systemic sclerosis, suggesting that IL-15 may have profibrotic effects. To test this hypothesis, we studied the effects of IL-15 on myofibroblast differentiation, an in vitro model of fibrosis development. METHODS: We used human fetal lung fibroblasts for the cytokine stimulation. As a marker of myofibroblast differentiation, α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) was analyzed by western blot and quantitative real-time PCR. The well-known profibrotic cytokine, transforming growth factor-β1(TGF-β1), was used for comparison, and TGF-β signaling paths were also studied. RESULTS: IL-15 did not induce α-SMA expression, a marker for myofibroblast differentiation. Unexpectedly, IL-15 counteracted TGF-β1-mediated α-SMA expression. Moreover, TGF-β1-induced expression of collagen, fibronectin and connective tissue growth factor was attenuated by addition of IL-15. There was no effect of IL-15 on early events in the TGF-β signaling cascades. CONCLUSION: IL-15 has anti-fibrotic properties that, speculatively however, may be insufficient in systemic sclerosis.
  Macitentan (ACT-064992), under development by Actelion Ltd in collaboration with Japanese licensee Nippon Shinyaku Co Ltd, is an orally active, non-peptide dual endothelin (ET)(A) and ET(B) receptor antagonist for the potential treatment of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). Scientific evidence suggests that the ET system may play an important role in the pathobiology of several cardiovascular diseases. A major therapeutic advance for the treatment of patients with PAH and IPF has been the pharmacological control of the activated ET system with ET receptor antagonists. Macitentan, because of its ability to target the tissues and to block both ET(A) and ET(B) receptors, is emerging as a new agent to treat cardiovascular disorders associated with chronic tissue ET system activation. The phase I and II clinical trials conducted to date have demonstrated that macitentan increases plasma levels of ET-1, displays dose-dependent pharmacokinetics, and was well tolerated in healthy volunteers and patients. At the time of publication, a phase II trial in patients with IPF and a phase III trial in patients with PAH was ongoing. It is expected that the results of these trials will validate the safety and efficacy of macitentan.
  Accumulating evidence suggests that gender can have a profound effect on incidence and severity of a variety of pulmonary diseases. To address the influence of gender on the development of silica-induced pulmonary fibrosis we instilled 0.2 g / Kg silica into male and female C57BL/6 mice and examined the fibrotic and inflammatory response at 14 days post-exposure. Both silica-exposed male and female mice had significant increases in total lung hydroxyproline compared to saline controls. However, silica-exposed female mice had significantly less total lung hydroxyproline than silica-exposed male mice. This observation was confirmed by color thresholding image analysis. Interestingly, silica-exposed female mice had significantly more inflammatory cells, the majority of which were macrophages, as well as higher levels of the macrophage-specific chemokines MCP-1 and CCL9 in whole lung lavage compared to silica-exposed male mice. We also show that at baseline, estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) mRNA expression is lower in female mice than in males and that ERalpha mRNA expression is decreased by silica exposure. Finally, we show that the response of ovariectomized female mice to silica instillation is similar to that of male mice. These observations taken together show that gender influences the lung response to silica.
  BACKGROUND: Initial pulmonary Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) is currently treated with intensive antibiotic therapy. At this stage, inflammation and tissue injury might have already occurred. Moreover, bacterial eradication is not always achieved. Prophylactic treatment against P aeruginosa seemed to have a preventive effect in retrospective studies. A study was undertaken to establish prospectively the effect of cycled prophylactic treatment on prevention of initial P aeruginosa infection in children with CF. METHODS: This 3-year triple-blind randomised controlled trial included 65 children with CF without P aeruginosa infection. Intervention existed of 3-monthly 3-week treatments with oral ciprofloxacin and inhaled colistin or both placebo controls. The primary outcome was P aeruginosa infection. Secondary outcomes were serum anti-Pseudomonas antibodies, pulmonary function, exacerbations, chest x-ray scores, inflammation parameters, respiratory pathogens and antimicrobial resistance. RESULTS: There was no difference in acquisition of P aeruginosa infection between the control and treatment groups (annual incidence 14% vs 11%; HR 0.738, 95% CI 0.299 to 1.822). Anti-Pseudomonas antibodies emerged earlier in the control group, but this difference had disappeared after 3 years. Chronic infection was observed in 19% of controls and 12% of treated patients. Decline in pulmonary function and other clinical outcomes did not differ between the two groups. In the treatment group, significantly fewer Gram-positive bacteria and Enterobacteriaceae were observed but there were more non-P aeruginosa non-fermentative Gram-negative bacteria. Conclusions Three-monthly cycled anti-P aeruginosa prophylaxis does not reduce the risk of initial and chronic infection in P aeruginosa-negative children with CF of all ages. Shifts in bacterial colonisation demand caution. Trial Registration Number ISRCTN 11604593.
  Pseudomonas aeruginosa is isolated in sputum cultures from cystic fibrosis (CF) patients and adults with bronchiectasis (BS) and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, but it is not well known if the characteristics of colonization in these latter patients are similar to those with CF. We examined 125 P. aeruginosa isolates obtained from 31 patients suffering from these diseases by pulsed field gel electrophoresis and genotyping of mucA and fpvA genes. The pattern of colonization, with dominance of a clonal strain and incidence of mucoid phenotypes, was similar in every group of patients; however, in some CF and BS patients, we detected the replacement or coexistence of 2 main clones. The main differences were found in the nucleotide position of less common mucA mutations, other than mucA22, and in the predominance of the different types of the pyoverdine receptor. Our results support a similar colonization pattern by P. aeruginosa in the different obstructive pulmonary diseases.
  Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder of lysosomal storage characterized by the triad of occulocutaneous albinism, bleeding diathesis, and pulmonary fibrosis. Sarcoidosis is a disease characterized by the development of noncaseating granulomas, most commonly affecting the lungs. The pathophysiology, histological findings, clinical symptoms, and treatment of the pulmonary manifestations of Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome are distinct from those of sarcoidosis. As patients with occulocutaneous and bleeding manifestations of Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome may also develop pulmonary fibrosis, the authors present this case to illustrate that pulmonary symptoms must be carefully evaluated in those with this syndrome because in this case, the patient developed underlying pulmonary sarcoidosis. To the authors' knowledge, this is the first documented case of Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome with concomitant pulmonary sarcoidosis.
  1,2-Dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane is used in cosmetics and other household products. 1,2-Dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane was nominated for study by the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences because of its widespread use as a component of numerous over-the-counter health care products. Male and female F344/N rats and B6C3F1 mice received 1,2-dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane (greater than 99% pure) in acetone (2-week and 3-month studies) or 95% ethanol (2-year studies) by dermal administration for 2 weeks, 3 months, or 2 years. Genetic toxicology studies were conducted in Salmonella typhimurium, Escherichia coli, and mouse peripheral blood erythrocytes. 2-WEEK STUDY IN RATS Groups of five male and five female rats were dermally administered 0, 37.5, 75, 150, 300, or 600 mg 1,2-dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane/kg body weight in acetone, 5 days per week for 16 days. All male and female rats survived to the end of the study. Mean body weights of dosed male and female rats were similar to those of the vehicle controls. Irritation, thickened skin, and ulcers were observed at the site of application in most dosed males and females. The thyroid gland weights of males administered 600 mg/kg were significantly less than those of the vehicle controls. The liver and kidney weights of 300 and 600 mg/kg females were significantly increased. A spectrum of nonneoplastic lesions including epidermal hyperplasia and hyperkeratosis, sebaceous gland hyperplasia, and dermal chronic active inflammation occurred at the site of application in all dosed groups of rats. Necrosis, ulcer, and parakeratosis of the epidermis occurred in most dosed groups of rats. 2-WEEK STUDY IN MICE Groups of five male and five female mice were dermally administered 0, 75, 150, 300, 600, or 1,200 mg/kg 1,2-dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane in acetone, 5 days per week for 16 days. All male and female mice survived to the end of the study. The final mean body weight of 300 mg/kg males was significantly less than that of the vehicle controls. Hyperactivity was observed in all dosed groups of mice. Irritation, thickened skin, and ulcers were observed at the site of application in dosed mice. The liver weights of 600 and 1,200 mg/kg males and 1,200 mg/kg females were significantly increased relative to those of the vehicle control groups. The heart weights of 600 and 1,200 mg/kg males and the kidney weights of 150 and 600 mg/kg males were significantly increased. The thymus weights of males administered 300 mg/kg or greater and those of all dosed groups of females were significantly decreased. Skin lesions at the site of application including epidermal hyperplasia, hyperkeratosis, parakeratosis, necrosis, and ulcers; dermal chronic active inflammation; and sebaceous gland hyperplasia occurred in all dosed groups of mice. Necrosis of the dermis occurred in most dosed groups of mice. 3-MONTH STUDY IN RATS Groups of 10 male and 10 female rats were dermally administered 0, 0.2, 0.6, 2, 6, or 18 mg/kg 1,2-dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane in acetone, 5 days per week for 14 weeks. All male rats survived to the end of the study. One 2 mg/kg female rat died on day 91. Mean body weights of dosed male and female rats were similar to those of the vehicle controls. Clinical findings of toxicity included thin hair coat in male and female rats and irritation at the site of application in males. At the site of application, the incidences of epidermal hyperplasia in males administered 0.6 mg/kg or greater and females administered 2 mg/kg or greater and the incidences of epidermal hyperkeratosis in all dosed groups of rats were significantly increased. In the dermis at the site of application, the incidences of chronic active inflammation in 6 and 18 mg/kg males and females administered 2 mg/kg or greater and sebaceous gland hyperplasia in males administered 6 or 18 mg/kg were significantly increased. 3-MONTH STUDY IN MICE Groups of 10 male and 10 female mice were dermally administered 0, 0.2, 0.6, 2, 6, or 18 mg/kg 1,2-dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane in acetone, 5 days per week for 14 weeks. All mice survived to the end of the study. Mean body weights of dosed male and female mice were similar to those of the vehicle controls. Irritation at the site of application was increased in male mice administered 18 mg/kg. The liver and lung weights of dosed females were generally significantly less than those of the vehicle control group. The incidences of minimal to mild epidermal hyperplasia and hyperkeratosis at the site of application were significantly increased in male and female mice administered 2 mg/kg or greater. The incidence of epidermal necrosis in 18 mg/kg males and the incidences of epidermal parakeratosis in 6 and 18 mg/kg males were significantly increased. In the dermis, the incidences of minimal to mild chronic active inflammation in 18 mg/kg males and in females administered 2 mg/kg or greater and fibrosis in 18 mg/kg males and females were significantly increased. The incidences of sebaceous gland hyperplasia at the site of application were significantly increased in males and females administered 6 or 18 mg/kg. 2-YEAR STUDY IN RATS Groups of 50 male and 50 female rats were dermally administered 0, 2, 6, or 18 mg/kg 1,2-dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane in 95% ethanol, 5 days a week for 104 to 105 weeks. Survival of males administered 18 mg/kg was significantly greater than that of the vehicle controls. Body weights of 18 mg/kg males and females were 7% less than those of the vehicle control groups after 1 year. Irritation at the site of application was reported in most males and females administered 6 or 18 mg/kg. There were no increases in the incidences of neoplasms in dosed rats. At the site of application, the incidences of epidermal hyperplasia in males and females administered 6 or 18 mg/kg and the incidences of hyperkeratosis of the epidermis in all dosed groups were significantly increased. The incidences of minimal to mild inflammation in the dermis at the site of application were significantly increased in males administered 6 or 18 mg/kg and in all dosed groups of females. The incidence of epidermal necrosis at the site of application in 18 mg/kg females was significantly increased. The incidences of inflammation of the nose were significantly increased in all dosed groups of male rats. The combined incidence of mammary gland fibroadenoma, adenoma, or adenocarcinoma occurred with a negative trend, and the incidence was significantly decreased in 6 mg/kg female rats. 2-YEAR STUDY IN MICE Groups of 50 male and 50 female mice were dermally administered 0, 0.6, 2, or 6 mg/kg 1,2-dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane in 95% ethanol, 5 days a week for 105 weeks. Survival of male and female mice was similar to that of the vehicle controls. Body weights of male and female dosed groups were similar to those of the vehicle control groups. No clinical findings were attributed to administration of 1,2-dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane. There were no increases in the incidences of neoplasms in dosed mice. At the site of application, the incidences of minimal to mild hyperplasia of the epidermis were significantly increased in 2 and 6 mg/kg males and in all dosed groups of females. The incidences of minimal to mild chronic active inflammation in the dermis were significantly increased in all dosed groups of females. GENETIC TOXICOLOGY 1,2-Dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane was not mutagenic in any of several strains of Salmonella typhimurium or Escherichia coli when tested with and without hamster and/or rat liver metabolic activation enzymes (S9). In addition, no increase in the frequency of micronucleated erythrocytes was observed in male or female mice treated for 3 months with 1,2-dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane by dermal application in acetone, indicating no potential for inducing chromosomal alterations in dividing cells in this test system. CONCLUSIONS Under the conditions of these 2-year dermal studies there was no evidence of carcinogenic activity of 1,2-dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane in male or female F344/N rats administered 2, 6, or 18 mg/kg. There was no evidence of carcinogenic activity of 1,2-dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane in male or female B6C3F1 mice administered 0.6, 2, or 6 mg/kg. 1,2-dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane administration induced nonneoplastic lesions at the site of application in male and female rats and mice. Synonyms: 2-Bromo-2-(bromomethyl)glutaronitrile; 2-bromo-2-(bromomethyl)pentanedinitrile; methyldibromoglutaronitrile Trade names: Merguard 1190; Merguard 1200; Tektamer 38; Tektamer 38AD; Tektamer LV.
  Endothelin 1 (ET-1) is an endogenous peptide that promotes vasoconstriction, endothelial and smooth muscle cell (SMC) proliferation, and fibrosis. ET-1 receptor antagonists are an important treatment strategy for pulmonary arterial hypertension, but less effective in systemic vascular disease. This observation suggests a special role for ET-1 in the pulmonary circulation. We hypothesized that ET-1 contributes to the pathogenesis of pulmonary arterial hypertension, in part, by promoting pulmonary vascular SMC migration. ET-1 treatment promoted migration in 3 distinct types of cultured pulmonary SMC. Pulmonary SMC migration was blocked by an ETA receptor selective agonist and a combined ETA-ETB antagonist, but not by a selective ETB antagonist. In contrast to the effect on pulmonary SMCs, ET-1 had no effect on migration of aortic SMCs. Flow cytometry showed that the ETA receptor was expressed at comparable levels on pulmonary and aortic SMCs, excluding receptor density as an explanation for the divergent effect. ET-1-induced pulmonary SMC migration was blocked by the structurally distinct MEK inhibitors PD98059 and U0126, consistent with a role for ERK1/2 MAP kinase. By Western blot in cultured cells and immunohistochemistry in ex vivo vessels, ET-1 stimulated phosphorylation of ERK1/2 as efficaciously as platelet-derived growth factor in pulmonary, but not aortic, SMCs. In conclusion, ET-1 induces SMC migration, with the ETA receptor tightly coupled to ERK1/2 phosphorylation only in the pulmonary circulation. This finding may help explain the striking difference in the efficacy of endothelin receptor blockers for pulmonary hypertension as compared to that for systemic cardiovascular disease.
  Thy-1 is a cell surface glycoprotein present on normal lung fibroblasts but absent from the fibroblastic foci of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). Thy-1 correlates inversely with fibrogenic phenotypic characteristics and function as a âfibrosis suppressorâ. Promoter region hypermethylation can silence Thy-1 expression in fibroblastic foci, suggesting that epigenetic regulation is important in programming the fibrotic phenotype. We examined whether histone modifications are important in regulating Thy-1 expression in lung fibroblasts. Treatment with the histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) restored Thy-1 expression in Thy-1- cells in a time- and dosage- dependent fashion, and was associated with enrichment of histone acetylation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) demonstrated Thy-1 depletion of trimethylated H3K27 after 24 hours of TSA treatment, concurrent with enrichment of trimethylated H3K4 and acetylated H4. Bisulfite sequencing of the Thy-1 promoter region revealed demethylation of the previously hypermethylated CpG sites after treatment with TSA. Although Thy-1 was hypermethylated in Thy-1- lung fibroblasts, we observed that Thy-1- cells have lower global DNA methylation when compared to Thy-1+ lung fibroblasts, which was partially reversed by TSA treatment. TSA treatment upregulates total methyltransferases activity in these cells. Our data indicate that Thy-1 silencing is regulated by histone modifications in addition to promoter hypermethylation in lung fibroblasts. Additionally, our findings indicate that alteration of histone modifications alters DNA methylation. Understanding the molecular hierarchy of events with respect to reactivation of transcription and reversal of histone modification will be critical to understanding and modifying the regulated expression of Thy-1, a tumor- and fibrosis-suppressor gene.
  Cystic fibrosis (CF), the most common fatal monogenic disease in the US, results from mutations in CFTR, a chloride channel. The mechanisms by which CFTR mutations cause lung disease in CF are not fully defined, but may include altered ion and water transport across the airway epithelium and aberrant inflammatory and immune responses to pathogens within the airways. We have shown that Cftr-/- mice mount an exaggerated IgE response towards Aspergillus fumigatus (Af) with higher levels of IL-13 and IL-4, mimicking both the Th-2 biased immune responses seen in CF patients. Herein, we demonstrated that these aberrations are primarily due to Cftr deficiency in lymphocytes rather than in the epithelium. Adoptive transfer experiments with Cf splenocytes confer higher IgE response to Af as compared to hosts receiving wild-type splenocytes. The predilection of Cftr-deficient lymphocytes to mount Th2 responses with high IL-13 and IL-4 was confirmed by in vitro antigen recall experiments. Conclusive data on this phenomenon were obtained with conditional Cftr knockout mice, where mice lacking Cftr in T-cell lineages developed higher IgE than their wild-type littermate controls. Further analysis of Cftr-deficient lymphocytes revealed an enhanced intracellular Ca2+ flux in response to T cell receptor activation. This was accompanied by an increase in nuclear localization of the calcium-sensitive transcription factor NFAT, which could drive the IL-13 response. In summary, our data identified that CFTR dysfunction in T cells can lead directly to aberrant immune responses. These findings implicate the lymphocyte population as a potentially important target for CF therapeutics.
  Bone marrow-derived progenitor cells can fuse with cells of several different tissues, including lung, especially following injury. Despite many reports of cell fusion, few studies have examined the function of the resulting hybrid cells. We cocultured human multipotent stromal cells (hMSCs) and normal human bronchial epithelial cells (NHBEs) and observed the formation of hMSC/NHBE heterokaryons. The heterokaryons expressed several proteins characteristic of epithelial cells, such as keratin and occludin. Hybrid cells also expressed the mRNAs and proteins for 2 important ion channels that maintain bronchial and alveolar fluid balance: the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) and the amiloride-sensitive epithelial Na(+) channel (ENaC). By immunocytochemistry, CFTR was expressed in many hybrid cells but was absent or low in others. Whole-cell patch-clamp recordings demonstrated a glibenclamide-sensitive current in the presence of barium chloride, consistent with functional CFTR channels, in control NHBEs and hMSC/NHBE heterokaryons. Total cell capacitance measurements showed that the membrane surface area of heterokaryons was similar to that of NHBEs. Heterokaryons expressed the alpha- and gamma-ENaC subunits but did not express the beta-ENaC subunit, indicating the inability to form a complete ENaC channel. In addition, hybrid cells formed by the fusion of hMSCs with immortalized bronchial cells that expressed CFTR DeltaF508 did not lead to reprogramming of the hMSC nucleus and expression of wild-type CFTR mRNA. Our data show that reprogramming can be incomplete following fusion of adult progenitor cells and somatic cells and may lead to altered cell function.-Curril, I. M., Koide, M., Yang, C. H., Segal, A., Wellman, G. C., Spees, J. L. Incomplete reprogramming after fusion of human multipotent stromal cells and bronchial epithelial cells.
  Patients with adult congenital heart disease are at increased risk of ventricular arrhythmia (VA) and sudden cardiac death, although no clear predictors have been found. Ventricular programmed stimulation has been shown to predict clinical ventricular tachycardia and sudden death events, but the role of screening electrophysiology studies (S-EPSs) in this population remains poorly defined. Therefore, we sought to determine the prevalence of inducible VA and to evaluate the clinical predictors in a heterogeneous group of patients with adult congenital heart disease (> or =18 years old) undergoing S-EPSs at preoperative or interventional cardiac catheterization. Studies for the primary evaluation of clinical VA were excluded. The demographic, clinical, and diagnostic findings were compared between the patients with positive and negative findings. From 2005 to 2009, 80 patients (mean age 30 +/- 9 years) underwent S-EPSs, and 23 had inducible VA. The diagnoses for those with studies positive for VA included tetralogy of Fallot (n = 12), d-transposition of the great arteries (n = 6), pulmonary stenosis (n = 2), double outlet right ventricle (n = 1), double inlet left ventricle (n = 1), and Ebstein's anomaly (n = 1). Men were significantly more likely to have a S-EPS positive for VA (p = 0.015). Increasing QRS duration, decreasing peak oxygen uptake (percentage of predicted), and ventricular fibrosis with cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging were significantly associated with studies positive for VA (p <0.05). Combined fibrosis and a peak oxygen uptake <80% of predicted had 100% sensitivity for positive VA findings. In conclusion, almost 30% of those with adult congenital heart disease undergoing S-EPSs had inducible VA. A prolonged QRS duration, diminished exercise capacity, and the presence of ventricular fibrosis were significantly associated with findings positive for VA and might improve patient selection for screening evaluations.
  BACKGROUND: About 80% lung cancers belong to non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and more than 70% are in advanced stage. The aim of this study was to evaluate the clinical efficacy and toxicity of erlotinib and GP/TP regimen on advanced non-small cell lung cancer. METHODS: Ninety-one advanced NSCLC patients with different treatments from January 2007 to April 2009 in our hospital were retrospectively analyzed. Ninety-one patients were divided into the erlotinib and TP/GP group. Erlotinib group: received erlotinib 150 mg/dl TP/GP group: the original chemotherapy for advanced non-small cell lung cancer. The cycles were repeated for 21 days. The patients were given docetaxel (80 mg/m(2), d1) or gemcitabine (1 000 mg/m(2), d1, 8) +cisplatin (70 mg/m(2), d2); then the adverse reaction and clinical efficacy were recorded during 3 months. RESULTS: Total 91 patients were evaluated for efficacy. The total rate of effect was 23.33% in erlotinib group. The side effects were erythra, diarrhea and vomiting. Pulmonary fibrosis was found in one patient after 21 days. TP/GP group: the total rate of effect was 27.78% and 28% and the side effects were bone marrow depression and reaction of gastrointestinal tract. There were no significantly difference between the two groups in the total rate of effect (P>0.05). But the side effects were less in erlotinib group, and there were significantly difference between the two groups. CONCLUSIONS: Erlotinib on advanced non-small cell lung cancer shows more effectiveness and adverse reactions are tolerable. The further clinical study should be warranted.
  Lung infections caused by the opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa can present as a spectrum of clinical entities from a rapidly fatal pneumonia in a neutropenic patient to a multi-decade bronchitis in patients with cystic fibrosis. P. aeruginosa is ubiquitous in our environment, and one of the most versatile pathogens studied, capable of infecting a number of diverse life forms and surviving harsh environmental factors. It is also able to quickly adapt to new environments, including the lung, where it orchestrates virulence factors to acquire necessary nutrients, and if necessary, turn them off to prevent immune recognition. Despite these capabilities, P. aeruginosa rarely infects healthy human lungs. This is secondary to a highly evolved host defence mechanism that efficiently removes inhaled or aspirated pseudomonads. Many arms of the respiratory host defence have been elucidated using P. aeruginosa as a model pathogen. Human infections with P. aeruginosa have demonstrated the importance of the mechanical barrier functions including mucus clearance, and the innate immune system, including the critical role of the neutrophilic response. As more models of persistent or biofilm P. aeruginosa infections are developed, the role of the adaptive immune response will likely become more evident. Understanding the pathogenesis of P. aeruginosa, and the respiratory host defence response to it has, and will continue to, lead to novel therapeutic strategies to help patients.
  Abstract Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) is a rare pulmonary disorder caused by hypersensitivity to Aspergillus fumigatus. The prevalence is estimated to be about 1-2% in adult patients with asthma and 2-15% in patients with cystic fibrosis. In paediatric patients with asthma, only single case reports on ABPA exist. We report on a 13-year-old boy with allergic asthma complicated by ABPA. Despite the presentation of typical clinical symptoms, it took 6 years before he was diagnosed. The clinical course improved rapidly after ABPA therapy was started, and 12 months after diagnosis, the boy is still free of symptoms. Clinical symptoms of ABPA may be unspecific making a rapid diagnosis difficult in some cases. However, a delay in diagnosis and treatment increases the risk for irreversible lung damage. Once bronchiectasis has developed, the outcome is unfavourable. Thus, ABPA has to be considered in patients whose asthma remains uncontrolled despite adequate therapy.
  We present a case of interstitial nephritis and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI) in a patient treated with pemetrexed (500 mg/m(2)) for non-small cell lung cancer. Renal impairment and diabetes insipidus appeared after the first treatment cycle while he totally received four cycles of chemotherapy. There was not any significant myelosuppression and the patient was on regular supplementation with folic acid and vitamin B(12). He was not on any other medications and he did not receive any nephrotoxic agents. Kidney biopsy showed acute tubular necrosis together with interstitial inflammatory infiltrate of mononuclear cells and interstitial fibrosis occupying 25% of the cortex. There was not any improvement of renal function after a 2-week trial of oral prednisone. In the present case report, we review the literature for pemetrexed-induced renal toxicity and the possible mechanisms involved.
  Sarcoidosis is a complex disease with autoimmune basis and still unknown etiology. We have screened for mutations in the cystic fibrosis conductance regulator (CFTR) gene and genotyped single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the tumor necrosis factor (TNF), interferon alpha-10 (IFNA10), IFNA17, and interferon gamma (IFNG) genes in 89 Greek patients with sarcoidosis and 212 control subjects to detect possible association between them and the risk for developing sarcoidosis. We have found a statistically significant increase (p = 6.1 x 10(-8)) of CFTR mutation carriers in the population of patients with sarcoidosis versus the control population. A difference was also noted within the group of patients with sarcoidosis where the ones with CFTR mutations suffered more frequently from dyspnea than those without (p = 5 x 10(-6)). Our study did not reproduce the associations previously noted with the TNF, IFNA10, IFNA17, and IFNG genes, which highlights the genetic complexity of the disorder and is in agreement with previous studies showing that CFTR might be an important factor in the clinical course of the disease.
  The Purines 2010: Adenine Nucleosides and Nucleotides in Biomedicine meeting, held in Tarragona, Spain, included topics covering new findings in the field of purinergic signaling and the development of purine-based drugs. This conference report highlights selected presentations on developments in purinerigic signaling, medicinal chemistry, the therapeutic potential of purine-based drugs, and the role of purines and adenosine receptors in neurodegenerative disorders, sickle cell disease, bone homeostasis, pulmonary fibrosis and pain. Investigational drugs discussed include CF-101 (Can-Fite BioPharma Ltd/NIH/Kwang Dong Pharmaceutical Co Ltd/Seikagaku Corp) and denufosol tetrasodium (Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Therapeutics Inc/Inspire Pharmaceuticals Inc).
  PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Recent literature on Aspergillus fumigatus infection and allergy in cystic fibrosis have expanded our understanding of many aspects of allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, and bring new attention to A. fumigatus airways infection and A. fumigatus allergy without allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA). RECENT FINDINGS: ABPA, A. fumigatus infection and A. fumigatus allergy without ABPA all likely worsen cystic fibrosis (CF) lung disease. Studies examining utility of new serologic assays for diagnosing ABPA include evaluations of standardized measurement of A. fumigatus-specific IgG, serum chemokine TARC levels, and recombinant A. fumigatus allergens; as yet, none appear ideal. Although oral glucocorticoids remain primary therapy, toxicity and incomplete control have led to an ongoing search for further safe and effective agents including itraconazole and voriconazole, intravenous pulse methylprednisolone, nebulized amphotericin B and omalizumab. Little controlled treatment data is available. SUMMARY: Diagnosis of CF-ABPA remains difficult, but improvements in serologic assays are occurring. Treatment remains in many cases unsatisfactory, and new agents offer promise but await proper controlled trials of safety and efficacy. A. fumigatus airway infection and A. fumigatus allergy without ABPA are emerging as further complications of A. fumigatus respiratory colonization in patients with CF, but prospective studies are needed to corroborate largely retrospective findings.
  Cystic fibrosis (CF) is one of the most common autosomal recessive diseases among Caucasians caused by a mutation in the CFTR gene. However, the clinical outcome of CF pulmonary disease varies remarkably even in patients with the same CFTR genotype. This has led to a search for genetic modifiers located outside the CFTR gene. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of functional variants in prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase genes (COX1 and COX2) on the severity of lung disease in CF patients. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first time when analysis of COX1 and COX2 as potential CF modifiers is provided. The study included 94 CF patients homozygous for F508del mutation of CFTR. To compare their clinical condition, several parameters were recorded, e.g. a unique clinical score: disease severity status (DSS). To analyse the effect of non-CFTR genetic polymorphisms on the clinical course of CF patients, the whole coding region of COX1 and selected COX2 polymorphisms were analysed. Statistical analysis of genotype-phenotype associations revealed a relationship between the heterozygosity status of identified polymorphisms and better lung function. These results mainly concern COX2 polymorphisms: -765G>C and 8473T>C. The COX1 and COX2 polymorphisms reducing COX protein levels had a positive effect on all analysed clinical parameters. This suggests an important role of these genes as protective modifiers of pulmonary disease in CF patients, due to inhibition of arachidonic acid conversion into prostaglandins, which probably reduces the inflammatory process.
  Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are enzymes that balance the acetylation activities of histone acetyltransferases (HATs) on chromatin remodeling and play essential roles in regulating gene transcription. In the past several years, the role of HDACs in cancer initiation and progression, as well as the therapeutic effects of HDAC inhibitors in various types of cancer, has been well studied. Recent studies indicated that HDAC activity is also associated with the development and progression of some chronic diseases characterized by fibrosis, including chronic kidney disease, cardiac hypertrophy, and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Here we review what is known about HDACs in the progression of tissue fibrosis and the potential applications of HDAC inhibitors in the treatment of disorders associated with fibroblast activation and proliferation.
  Prostaglandin (PG) D2 exerts contrasting activities in the inflamed lung via two receptors, the D prostanoid receptor (DP) and the Chemoattractant receptor-homologous molecule expressed on Th2 lymphocytes (CRTH2). DP activation is mainly known to inhibit pro-inflammatory cell functions. We tested here the effect of a DP specific agonist, BW245C ((4S)-(3-[(3R,S)-3-cyclohexyl-3-hydroxypropyl]-2,5-dioxo)-4-imidazolidineheptanoic acid), on pulmonary fibroblast functions in vitro and in a mouse model of lung fibrosis induced by bleomycin. DP mRNA expression was detected in cultured mouse lung primary fibroblasts and human fetal lung fibroblasts (HFL-1) and found up- and down-regulated by interleukin-13 and transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta, respectively. While micromolar concentrations of BW245C and PGD2 did not affect mouse fibroblast collagen synthesis or differentiation in myofibroblasts, they both inhibited fibroblast basal and TGF-beta-induced proliferation in vitro. The repeated administration of BW245C (500 nmol/kg bw instilled trans-orally in the lungs 2 days before and 3 times per week during 3 weeks) in bleomycin-treated mice significantly decreased both inflammatory cell recruitment and collagen accumulation in the lung (21 d). Our results indicate that BW245C can reduce lung fibrosis in part via its activity on fibroblast proliferation and suggest that DP activation should be considered as a new therapeutic target in fibro-proliferative lung diseases.
  In recent decades, advances in nanotechnology engineering have given rise to the rapid development of many novel applications in the biomedical field. However, studies into the health and safety of these nanomaterials are still lacking. The main concerns are the adverse effects to health caused by acute or chronic exposure to nanoparticles (NPs), especially in the workplace environment. The lung is one of the main routes of entry for NPs into the body and, hence, a likely site for accumulation of NPs. Once NPs enter the interstitial air spaces and are quickly taken up by alveolar cells, they are likely to induce toxic effects. In this review, we highlight the different aspects of lung toxicity resulting from NP exposure, such as generation of oxidative stress, DNA damage and inflammation leading to fibrosis and pneumoconiosis, and the underlying mechanisms causing pulmonary toxicity.
  Biliary fibrosis and resultant cirrhosis are among the most common outcomes of chronic liver diseases. Currently, liver transplantation remains the only effective treatment. In seeking alternative therapeutic approaches, we focused on the potential use of the human Amniotic Membrane (AM). Indeed, AM has gained increasing importance for its anti-scarring, anti-inflammatory and wound healing properties, as well as for the multipotent differentiation ability and immunomodulatory features of AM-derived cells. Intriguingly, we have recently demonstrated that placenta-derived cells reduce lung fibrosis in bleomycin-treated mice, and that AM patches reduce post-ischemic cardiac injury in rats. Hence, we have now investigated the effects of human AM on biliary fibrosis induced in rats through the Bile Duct Ligation (BDL) procedure. A fragment of human AM was applied onto the liver surface after BDL and the effects on fibrosis establishment and progression were evaluated at different time points in comparison with fibrosis progression in control BDL rats. The degree of liver fibrosis was first assessedby the semiquantitative Knodell scoring system and, thereafter, by digital image morphometric analysis to quantify the area occupied by ductular reaction, activated myofibroblasts and collagen deposition. We demonstrated a significant reduction in the severity of BDL-induced fibrosis in AMtreated rats. Indeed, while fibrosis progressed rapidly in control BDL rats, leading to cirrhosis within 6 weeks, AM-treated rats showed confined fibrosis at the portal/periportal area with no signs of cirrhosis, and a reduction in collagen deposition to about 50% of levels observed in control BDL rats. In addition, the AM was able to significantly slow the gradual progression of the ductular reaction and reduce, at all time points, the area occupied by activated myofibroblasts. These findings suggest that human AM, when applied as a patch onto the liver surface, might inhibit fibrosis progression in BDL-injured livers, and could protect against hepatic damage associated with fibrotic degeneration.
  INTRODUCTION: Whether acute pancreatitis can occur in pancreatically insufficient individuals with cystic fibrosis remains a matter of debate. CASE PRESENTATION: We describe a case of acute pancreatitis occurring in a 52-year-old Caucasian Australian man with moderately severe cystic fibrosis lung disease and pancreatic insufficiency. An inflammatory mass within the head of his pancreas was confirmed using computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging and pancreatic biopsy, but serum amylase and lipase remained normal throughout the acute phase of his illness. His symptoms and the pancreatic mass resolved following the insertion of a biliary stent and the introduction of ursodeoxycholic acid. CONCLUSION: Our case report highlights the potential for acute pancreatitis to occur in patients with pancreatic insufficiency and cystic fibrosis. We further demonstrate that conventional biochemical markers that are normally assessed to confirm the diagnosis may not be of particular use. As patients with cystic fibrosis survive into their fourth and fifth decades of life, atypical presentations of acute pancreatitis may become more common.
  Summary Introduction: Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is characterized by the development of fibrosis of skin and internal organs that is associated with vascular damage. However, its related parameters have not been fully explored. The aim of this study was to investigate endothelial function in SSc and its relationship with systolic pulmonary artery pressure and systemic arterial compliance (SAC). Methods: We studied 14 SSc females (4 with diffuse and 10 with limited cutaneous form of the disease) and 14 healthy controls matched for age and for cardiovascular risk factors. Endothelium-dependent dilation (i.e. flow-mediated) and endothelium-independent (i.e. nitroglycerin-induced) dilation of the brachial artery were measured as the percentage of change from baseline (FMD and NMD, respectively). In patients with SSc, SAC, cardiac output (CO), systemic arterial resistance and pulmonary artery pressure were estimated using echocardiography Doppler. Results: Heart rate, brachial artery pressure and body mass index did not differ between patients with SSc and controls. Flow-mediated vasodilation (FMD) and NMD were significantly decreased in patients with SSc (10.3 +/- 8.6 versus 26.6 +/- 7.4%, P<0.001; 24.2 +/- 8.4 versus 33.3 +/- 10.1%, P<0.001, respectively). Postischaemia reactive hyperaemia was lower in patients with SSc (275 +/- 185 versus 618 +/- 366%, P<0.001). FMD and nitrate-mediated dilation (NMD) were associated with CO, but not with SAC; moreover, FMD correlated with pulmonary artery pressure and peripheral arterial resistance conversely to NMD. Conclusions: Endothelium function in SSc is impaired independently to SAC. Furthermore, the severity of both small artery and pulmonary artery involvement may impact on endothelium-dependant function.
  Human idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and non-specific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP) have been proposed to be attributable to oxidative stress. The nuclear factor, erythroid derived 2, like protein (NRF2)-sulfiredoxin-1 (SRX1) pathway was hypothesized to be associated with the pathogenesis of human pulmonary fibrosis. Several methods including digital morphometry were used in the assessment of the cell-specific localization and expression of NRF2 and SRX1 and selected proteins linked to their activation/stability in human IPF/usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP) and NSIP lung. The proteins of the NRF2 pathway were localized in the hyperplastic alveolar epithelium and inflammatory cells in IPF and NSIP, but were absent in the fibroblastic foci characteristic of IPF. Morphometric evaluation revealed NRF2 and KEAP1 to be significantly elevated in the hyperplastic alveolar epithelium compared with the normal alveolar epithelium, and NRF2 was remarkably expressed in the nuclear compartment of the hyperplastic cells. SRX1 was expressed mainly in alveolar macrophages, and the number of SRX1-positive macrophages/surface area was elevated in NSIP, a disease which contains more marked inflammatory reaction compared with the IPF/UIP lung. The expression of the NRF2 pathway in human IPF and NSIP is further evidence that the pathogenesis of human fibrotic lung diseases is oxidant-mediated and originates from the alveolar epithelium.
  SUMMARY: Lung disease in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) is characterized by recurrent bacterial respiratory infections and intense airway inflammation. Pattern recognition receptors such as Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) and TLR4 identify bacterial pathogens and activate the innate immune response. We therefore hypothesized that increased expression of these receptors would be found on circulating immune cells from children with CF. A cohort of 66 young children (median age 3 years) with CF was studied and compared to both healthy controls (n = 14) and children without CF who were being investigated for recurrent respiratory infections (non-CF disease controls; n = 17) of a similar age. Surface expression of TLR2 and TLR4 on peripheral blood monocytes was analyzed using flow cytometry. TLR4 expression was significantly higher in patients with CF compared to healthy controls (P = 0.017) and non-CF disease controls (P = 0.025) but did not vary according to the presence or absence of pulmonary infection with Gram-negative or Gram-positive bacteria (P = 0.387) in the CF group. In contrast, TLR2 expression was similar across all three study groups (P = 0.930). The increased surface expression of TLR4 seen in young children with CF appears to be related to having CF per se and not related to current pulmonary infection.
  RATIONALE: Loss of lung function in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) is associated with increased mortality and varies between individuals and over time. Predicting this decline could improve patient management. OBJECTIVES: To develop simple pulmonary outcome prediction (POP) tools to estimate lung function at age 6 in patients aged 2-5 years (POP(2-5)) and lung function change over a 4-year period in patients aged 6-17 years (POP(6-17)). METHODS: Analyses were conducted using patients from the Epidemiologic Study of CF (ESCF). To be included in any analysis, patients had to have 1 year of clinical history recorded in ESCF prior to a clinically stable routine Index Clinic Visit (ICV). In addition to this criterion, for the POP(2-5) tool patients had to be between 2 and 5 years old at ICV and have a second clinically stable visit with spirometric measures at age 6. For the POP(6-17) tool, patients had to be between the ages of 6 and 17 years old at an ICV that included spirometric measures and had to have a second clinically stable visit with spirometric measures from 3 to 5 years after ICV. All patients enrolled in ESCF who met these inclusion criteria were studied. POP(2-5) and POP(6-17) populations were further divided into development groups (with ICV before January 1, 1998) and validation groups (with ICV after that date). Development groups were used to model forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV(1)) percent predicted at age 6 years (for POP(2-5)) and annualized FEV(1)% predicted change from ICV to the second visit (for POP(6-17)) by multivariable linear regression using age, sex, weight-for-age percentile, cough, sputum production, clubbing, crackles, wheeze, sinusitis, number of exacerbations requiring intravenous antibiotics in the past year, elevated liver enzymes, pancreatic enzyme use, and respiratory tract culture status, plus height-for-age percentile (POP(2-5)) and index FEV(1) (POP(6-17)). Integer-based POP(2-5) and POP(6-17) tools created from selected variables were evaluated by Pearson correlation and then prospectively validated with separate data collected later from ESCF patients with ICV after January 1, 1998. MAIN RESULTS: POP(2-5) and POP(6-17) development groups included 2,709 and 6,113 patients and validation groups included 3,458 and 7,086 patients, respectively. Variables retained were weight-for-age percentile, clubbing, crackles, wheeze, number of exacerbations, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa culture status (both tools), daily cough (POP(2-5)), and age, sex, and index FEV(1)% predicted (POP(6-17)). Correlation coefficients for POP(2-5) and POP(6-17) tools prospectively applied to validation groups were +0.32 and +0.37, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: These simple integer-based POP algorithms employ variables available at clinic visits and can be used to predict the probability of different future pulmonary outcomes for individual patients and patient populations. Pediatr. Pulmonol. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
  BACKGROUND: There is minimal literature available on the long-term outcome of pediatric non-cystic fibrosis (CF) bronchiectasis. AIM: To document 5-year outcomes of children with chest computerized tomography (CT) scan diagnosed bronchiectasis from a tertiary New Zealand (NZ) respiratory clinic. METHODS: Review of a clinical database identified 91 children. Demographics, clinical data, lung function, chest X-ray (CXR), sputum, presumed etiology, admission data, and the NZ deprivation index (NZDep) were collected. Univariate and multivariate regression were used to correlate clinical findings with lung function data and CXR scores using the Brasfield Scoring System. RESULTS: Of the 91 children, 53 (59%) were Pacific Island, 22 (24%) Maori, 14 (15%) European, and 2 (2%) Other. The median follow-up period was 6.7 years (range 5.0-15.3 years) and median age at diagnosis was 7.3 years (range 11 months-16 years). Lung function data (n = 64) showed a mean decline of -1.6% predicted/year. In 30 children lung function declined (mean FEV(1) -4.4% predicted/year, range 1-17%), remained stable in 13 and improved in 21 children (mean FEV(1) of +3% predicted/year, range 1-15%). Reduced lung function was associated with male gender, chronic Haemophilus influenzae infection, longevity of disease, and Maori and Pacific Island ethnicity. There was a significant correlation with FEV(1) and CXR score at beginning (n = 47, r = 0.45, P = 0.001) and end (n = 26, r = 0.59, P = 0.002) of the follow-up period. The only variable consistently related to CXR score was chronic Haemophilus influenzae infection occurring in 27 (30%) (r(2) = 0.52, P = <0.0001). Only four children were chronically infected with Pseudomonas species. Six children died. CONCLUSION: In our experience despite management in a tertiary multidisciplinary bronchiectasis clinic, progression of lung disease continues in a group of children and young adults. Pediatr. Pulmonol. (c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
  Oxidative stress in lung often occurs in humans during acute lung injury (ALI) and in the acute respiratory distress syndrome. The lung inflammatory response may proceed to the development of pulmonary fibrosis, a devastating complication that occurs in premature infants after prolonged exposure to high oxygen concentrations. Oxidant-related ALI can be induced by airway deposition of lipopolysaccharide or IgG immune complexes, resulting in activation of recruited neutrophils and residential macrophages, whose oxidants and proteases produce reversible ALI. In the presence of a powerful trigger of leukocytes (phorbol myristate acetate), or following intrapulmonary deposition of enzymes that generate oxidants, extensive endothelial and epithelial damage and destruction occurs, overwhelming repair mechanisms of lung and resulting in pulmonary fibrosis. How residential or circulating stem cells participate in regeneration of damaged/destroyed cells may provide clues regarding therapy in humans who are experiencing lung inflammatory damage.
  Tissue fibrosis is believed to be a manifestation of dysregulated repair following injury, in association with impaired reepithelialization, and aberrant myofibroblast activation and proliferation. Numerous pathways have been linked to the pathogenesis of fibrotic lung disease, including the death receptor Fas, which contributes to apoptosis of lung epithelial cells. A redox imbalance also has been implicated in disease pathogenesis, although mechanistic details whereby oxidative changes intersect with profibrotic signaling pathways remain elusive. Oxidation of cysteines in proteins, such as S-glutathionylation (PSSG), is known to act as a regulatory event that affects protein function. This manuscript will discuss evidence that S-glutathionylation regulates death receptor induced apoptosis, and the potential implications for cysteine oxidations in the pathogenesis of in fibrotic lung disease.
  alpha-Defensins, antimicrobial peptides produced mainly by neutrophils, have been reported to be associated with a wide variety of lung diseases, including idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), cystic fibrosis (CF), and diffuse panbronchiolitis (DPB). In each disease, alpha-defensins are located in different areas, such as around the alveolar septa in IPF and around the airways in CF and DPB, suggesting that alpha-defensins play different roles. Meanwhile, growth factors are known to contribute to IPF, CF, and DPB. alpha-Defensins are known to induce interleukin (IL)-8 in airway epithelial cells, but the effects of alpha-defensins on the release of growth factors from various components in the lung have not been sufficiently investigated. In the present study, the in vitro effects of human neutrophil peptide (HNP)-1 (a subtype of alpha-defensin) on the expressions of IL-8 and growth factors in lung fibroblasts, bronchial epithelial cells, and alveolar epithelial cells were examined. HNP-1 mainly enhanced the expression of IL-8 in epithelial cells, whereas it enhanced transforming growth factor-beta and vascular endothelial growth factor expressions in lung fibroblasts. These results suggest that alpha-defensins play different roles in the pathogenesis of IPF, CF, and DPB according to the location in the lung where the alpha-defensins are mainly produced.
  The development of methods to achieve efficient reprogramming of human cells while avoiding the permanent presence of reprogramming transgenes represents a critical step towards the use of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) for clinical purposes, such as disease modeling or reconstituting therapies. While several methods exist for generating iPSC free of reprogramming transgenes from mouse cells or neonatal normal human tissues, a sufficiently efficient reprogramming system is still needed in order to achieve the widespread derivation of disease-specific iPSC from humans with inherited or degenerative diseases. Here we report the use of a humanized version of a single lentiviral 'stem cell cassette' vector in order to accomplish efficient reprogramming of normal or diseased skin fibroblasts obtained from humans of virtually any age. Simultaneous transfer of either 3 or 4 reprogramming factors into human target cells using this single vector allows derivation of human iPSC containing a single excisable viral integration, that upon removal generates human iPSC free of integrated transgenes. As a proof of principle, here we apply this strategy to generate >100 lung disease-specific iPSC lines from individuals with a variety of diseases affecting the epithelial, endothelial, or interstitial compartments of the lung, including cystic fibrosis, alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency-related emphysema, scleroderma (SSc), and sickle cell disease. Moreover, we demonstrate that human iPSC generated with this approach have the ability to robustly differentiate into definitive endoderm in vitro, the developmental precursor tissue of lung epithelia.
  ET (endothelin)-1 was first described as a potent vasoconstrictor. Since then, many other deleterious properties mediated via its two receptors, ETA and ETB, have been described, such as inflammation, fibrosis and hyperplasia. These effects, combined with a wide tissue distribution of the ET system, its up-regulation in pathological situations and a local autocrine/paracrine activity due to a high tissue receptor binding, make the tissue ET system a key local player in end-organ damage. Furthermore, ET-1 interacts in tissues with other systems such as the RAAS (renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system) to exert its effects. In numerous genetically modified animal models, non-specific or organ-targeted ET-1 overexpression causes intense organ damage, especially hypertrophy and fibrosis, in the absence of haemodynamic changes, confirming a local activity of the ET system. ET receptor antagonists have been shown to prevent and sometimes reverse these tissue alterations in an organ-specific manner, leading to long-term benefits and an improvement in survival in different animal models. Potential for such benefits going beyond a pure haemodynamic effect have also been suggested by clinical trial results in which ET receptor antagonism decreased the occurrence of new digital ulcers in patients with systemic sclerosis and delayed the time to clinical worsening in patients with PAH (pulmonary arterial hypertension). The tissue ET system allows therapeutic interventions to provide organ selectivity and beneficial effects in diseases associated with tissue inflammation, hypertrophy or fibrosis.
  Different intervention trials have been so far conducted and others are ongoing to evaluate the effect of increased intake of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) in the prevention of several disorders affecting lungs and airways. They have been focused on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, acute respiratory distress syndrome, acute lung injury, pulmonary fibrosis, alteration of lung function in cystic fibrosis, as well as asthma and cachexia in lung cancer patients. Their outcomes are not always consistent, but, if beneficial effects were observed, they have been related mainly to the anti-inflammatory action of n-3 PUFAs. On the contrary, trials investigating their effects on the development and progression of lung cancer are still not available. This in spite of the huge number of equivalent studies performed on other kind of cancers (breast, colon and prostate cancer), which share with lung cancer the highest incidence in Western countries and an elevated sensitivity to chemoprevention. Contrasting results were also obtained by the few epidemiological studies available on lung cancer. However, different experimental studies, performed in vivo and in vitro, provided strong indications of the anti-tumor action of n-3 PUFAs against lung cancer, and identified molecular mechanisms for their action. In this review our effort will concentrate in critically reviewing the current evidence for the beneficial effect of n-3 PUFAs in inflammatory and neoplastic disorders of lungs and airways, and in identifying possible molecular mechanisms underlying their effects.
  Schistosomiasis is one of the most prevalent infectious diseases, endemic in more than 70 countries, mainly within the developing world. More than 200 million people might be infected worldwide; about 20 million of those might develop severe disease. The hepatosplenic form of schistosomiasis is the most prevalent form of chronic disease, characterised by the presence of periportal fibrosis and portal hypertension. Pulmonary hypertension is a well-recognised complication of hepatosplenic schistosomiasis. Recent prevalent studies revealed that schistosomiasis patients may develop precapillary and postcapillary forms of pulmonary hypertension, reinforcing the role of invasive haemodynamic measurements for the proper diagnosis. These studies also demonstrated that schistosomiasis associated pulmonary arterial hypertension may represent the most prevalent form of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). Many aspects regarding the appropriate management of Sch-PAH patients still remain to be elucidated, as the use of specific PAH therapy. Although the ongoing control programmes that started within the 1980s have clearly improved the schistosomiasis cenario worldwide, Sch-PAH will be seen for decades after proper control is reached, strengthening the current need for comprehensive studies aiming to clarify the multiple mechanisms involved in the pathophysiology of this particular subgroup of PAH.
  Accumulation of unwanted/misfolded proteins in aggregates has been observed in airways of patients with cystic fibrosis (CF), a life-threatening genetic disorder caused by mutations in the gene encoding the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). Here we show how the defective CFTR results in defective autophagy and decreases the clearance of aggresomes. Defective CFTR-induced upregulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and tissue transglutaminase (TG2) drive the crosslinking of beclin 1, leading to sequestration of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI(3)K) complex III and accumulation of p62, which regulates aggresome formation. Both CFTR knockdown and the overexpression of green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged-CFTR(F508del) induce beclin 1 downregulation and defective autophagy in non-CF airway epithelia through the ROS-TG2 pathway. Restoration of beclin 1 and autophagy by either beclin 1 overexpression, cystamine or antioxidants rescues the localization of the beclin 1 interactome to the endoplasmic reticulum and reverts the CF airway phenotype in vitro, in vivo in Scnn1b-transgenic and Cftr(F508del) homozygous mice, and in human CF nasal biopsies. Restoring beclin 1 or knocking down p62 rescued the trafficking of CFTR(F508del) to the cell surface. These data link the CFTR defect to autophagy deficiency, leading to the accumulation of protein aggregates and to lung inflammation.
  System-level modeling is beginning to be used to decipher high throughput data in the context of disease. In this study, we present an integration of expression microarray data with a genome-scale metabolic reconstruction of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in the context of a chronic cystic fibrosis (CF) lung infection. A genome-scale reconstruction of P. aeruginosa metabolism was tailored to represent the metabolic states of two clonally related lineages of P. aeruginosa isolated from the lungs of a CF patient at different points over a 44-month time course, giving a mechanistic glimpse into how the bacterial metabolism adapts over time in the CF lung. Metabolic capacities were analyzed to determine how tradeoffs between growth and other important cellular processes shift during disease progression. Genes whose knockouts were either significantly growth reducing or lethal in silico were also identified for each time point and serve as hypotheses for future drug targeting efforts specific to the stages of disease progression.
  RATIONALE: Infection with Burkholderia cepacia complex (BCC) bacteria in cystic fibrosis (CF) is associated with an unpredictable rate of pulmonary decline. Some BCC, but not others, elaborate copious mucoid exopolysaccharide endowing them with a gross mucoid phenotype, the clinical significance of which has not been described. OBJECTIVES: To determine if there was a correlation between bacterial mucoid phenotype, as assessed in a semi-quantitative manner from plate culture, and severity of disease as assessed by the rate of decline in lung function. METHODS: We performed a retrospective clinical review of 100 CF patients attending the Vancouver clinics between 1981 and 2007 and analyzed the rate of lung function decline (% predicted FEV1). MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Patients infected exclusively with nonmucoid BCC had a more rapid decline in lung function (annual FEV1 change: -8.51% +/- 2.41) than those infected with mucoid bacteria (-3.01% +/- 1.09; p < 0.05). Linear mixed-effects data modeling revealed a statistically significant inverse association between semi-quantitative mucoid exopolysaccharide production and rate of decline of lung function. In vitro incubation of BCC with ceftazidime and ciprofloxacin but not meropenem caused conversion of BCC from mucoid to nonmucoid CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest an inverse correlation between the quantity of mucoid exopolysaccharide production by BCC bacteria and rate of decline in CF lung function. Certain antibiotics may induce a change in bacterial morphology that enhances their virulence. A simple in vitro test of bacterial mucoidy may be useful in predicting the rate of decline of respiratory function in CF.
  Rationale Fibrotic response to lung injury depends upon development of a fibrogenic population of myofibroblasts. The importance of resident interstitial fibroblasts and role of TGFbeta in this process is unclear. Objectives To define the importance of TGFbeta signalling in resident lung fibroblasts in the development of experimental pulmonary fibrosis. Methods A compound genetic strategy in which mice homozygous for a floxed TbetaRII allele were crossed with a transgenic strain harbouring a fibroblast-specific transgene encoding ligand-dependent Cre-recombinase was employed. TbetaRII was deleted by postnatal administration of tamoxifen over 5 days to compound mutant mice with appropriate littermate controls. Illumina microarray gene profiling and qRT-PCR was used to confirm anergy to TGFbeta in explanted lung fibroblasts. Bleomycin lung injury was used to induce lung fibrosis which was analysed by histology and biochemical methods. Immunofluorescence was used to define cell populations after lung injury. Measurements and main results There was significant attenuation of fibrosis in mice after deletion of TbetaRII in resident fibroblasts. At 7 days after injury the number of fibrocytes and myofibroblasts was substantially reduced. Potential regulators of fibrosis were suggested by gene expression profiles that identified key candidate profibrotic genes, including Ctgf and endothelin-1 expressed by wildtype but not mutant lung fibroblasts. Conclusions Intact TGFbeta signalling in resident pulmonary fibroblasts is essential for pulmonary fibrosis to develop and our data support a key regulatory role of these cells in determining fibrocyte recruitment and myofibroblast differentiation.
  Cystic fibrosis (CF) is caused by mutations in the CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) that prevent its proper folding and trafficking to the apical membrane of epithelial cells. Absence of cAMP-mediated Cl(-) secretion in CF airways causes poorly hydrated airway surfaces in CF patients, and this condition is exacerbated by excessive Na(+) absorption. The mechanistic link between missing CFTR and increased Na(+) absorption in airway epithelia has remained elusive, although substantial evidence implicates hyperactivity of the epithelial Na(+) channel (ENaC). ENaC is known to be activated by selective endoproteolysis of the extracellular domains of its α- and γ-subunits, and it was recently reported that ENaC and CFTR physically associate in mammalian cells. We confirmed this interaction in oocytes by co-immunoprecipitation and found that ENaC associated with wild-type CFTR was protected from proteolytic cleavage and stimulation of open probability. In contrast, ΔF508 CFTR, the most common mutant protein in CF patients, failed to protect ENaC from proteolytic cleavage and stimulation. In normal airway epithelial cells, ENaC was contained in the anti-CFTR immunoprecipitate. In CF airway epithelial cultures, the proportion of full-length to total α-ENaC protein signal was consistently reduced compared with normal cultures. Our results identify limiting proteolytic cleavage of ENaC as a mechanism by which CFTR down-regulates Na(+) absorption.
  BACKGROUND: The number of adults living with cystic fibrosis (CF) is increasing, necessitating an assessment of knowledge in this growing population. METHODS: A questionnaire assessing CF knowledge was completed by 100 CF patients (median age: 26.0years, range 17-49years; median FEV(1): 57.0% predicted, range 20-127% predicted). Level of knowledge was correlated with clinical and sociodemographic characteristics. RESULTS: Questionnaire validation showed acceptable internal consistency (alpha=0.75) and test-retest reliability (0.94). Patients had fair overall understanding of CF (mean=72.4%, SD=13.1), with greater knowledge of lung and gastrointestinal topics (mean=81.6%, SD=11.6) than reproduction and genetics topics (mean=57.9%, SD=24.1). Females and those with post-secondary education scored significantly higher (p<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: This study validated a questionnaire that can be utilized to assess CF knowledge. Although CF patients understand most aspects of their disease, knowledge deficits are common - particularly regarding genetics and reproduction - and should be considered when developing CF education programs.
  Within the group of Idiopathic Interstitial Pneumonias (IIPs), above all Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis (IPF) poses a considerable diagnostic and therapeutic problem. Although genetic profiling indicates that IPF, Non Specific Interstitial Pneumonia (NSIP), and chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) are distinctly different diseases, in every day practice these diseases can be difficult to tell apart. Furthermore, treatment of these diseases is notoriously difficult. Serum biomarkers reflect our understanding of the underlying pathogenesis and potentially fulfill a role in establishing a diagnosis, prognosis and therapy. While no single biomarker is currently able to accurately predict the presence or absence of an IIP, a composite of several markers holds promise for the future. Several biomarkers, such as KL-6, surfactant proteins and circulating fibrocytes, appear to contribute to our insight into disease progression and prognosis. It is however uncertain whether these markers give us additional information to common diagnostic tests and their value has as yet to be validated for every day practice. Fortunately, the potential of biomarkers is increasingly recognized and biomarker data are prospectively gathered in current placebo-controlled therapeutic trials.
  AIM: To evaluate the ability of newly identified clinical factors to predict prognosis and survival in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and non-specific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP). METHODS: Seventy-eight patients referred to the University of Genoa and the Regional Hospital of Aosta between January 1995 and December 2006 were evaluated prospectively. Fifty-nine patients were diagnosed with IPF and 19 with NSIP on the basis of surgical lung biopsy specimens. Gender, age at diagnosis, smoking, New York Heart Association class (NYHA), systolic pulmonary artery pressure (sPAP), Octreoscan uptake index (UI), and therapy were the chosen variables. Primary end-point was survival. RESULTS: With the exception of gender and smoking history, all baseline patient characteristics correlated significantly with the diagnosis (IPF vs. NSIP). Median survival for the entire study group was 52.7 months. Univariate analysis showed poorer survival for the IPF group versus the NSIP group, and survival was significantly lower for older patients (p < 0.001). Multivariate analysis confirmed the negative prognostic effect of age (p < 0.001) on survival with a risk of death for older patients ( > OR =66 years old) being more than 4 times higher than that for younger patients (<58 yr.). NYHA class and pulmonary artery pressure were also significant predictors of survival, and all patients with a sPAP < OR = 35-mm Hg were alive at the end of the follow-up period. There was a good correlation between Octreoscan uptake index and the diagnosis. CONCLUSION: Diagnosis (IPF vs. NSIP), NYHA class, sPAP, and especially age appear to represent important prognostic indicators in the two most prevalent forms of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF and NSIP). Lower Octreoscan uptake values were found in all patients with IPF, suggesting that this test may have a role as a new predictor of survival for differentiating IPF from NSIP.
  IFN-gamma expression increases during the inflammatory response following bleomycin-injury in mice. In addition, IFN-gamma deficiency attenuates lung inflammation and fibrosis. Since IFN-gamma stimulates class II transactivator (CIITA) expression which activates major histocompatibility class (MHC) II and represses collagen expression, it was hypothesized that CIITA mediates IFN-gamma action following bleomycin injury. To test this hypothesis, two CIITA mouse lines, one carrying a mutation of the leucine-rich-region of CIITA (CIITA C-/-) and one with a deletion extending into the GTP-binding-domain (CIITA G-/-) were employed. IFN-gamma treatment of lung cells isolated from both strains of mice induced mutant CIITA expression which did not activate MHC II transcription. Interestingly, collagen expression was similar in both mutant mouse strains and comparable to C57BL/6 (wild type) mice. When mice were exposed to intratracheal bleomycin, both strains of CIITA mutant mice retained body weight and exhibited altered inflammation at 14 days post-bleomycin injury compared to bleomycin-treated wild type mice. However, there was no difference in fibrosis as judged by histology, mRNA, and protein expression of lungs. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) cells from CIITA C-/- and C57BL/6 lungs were examined at 3, 7, and 14 days post-bleomycin injury. CD4 mRNA expression in BAL cells was down-regulated whereas IL-4 and IL-10 expression were up-regulated in CIITA C-/- mice indicating a diminished, skewed Th2 response. The expression of IFN-gamma was the same in all mice tested. Combined, our data suggest that CIITA mutations altered the immune response without affecting fibrosis.
  Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a progressive fibrotic disease of the lung parenchyma, without curative treatment. Gremlin is a bone morphogenic protein (BMP) antagonist, its expression being increased in IPF lungs. It has been implicated in promoting myofibroblast accumulation, likely through inhibited fibroblast apoptosis and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). In the current study we examined the effects of selective adenovirus-mediated overexpression of Gremlin in rat lungs. We show that transient Gremlin overexpression results in activation of alveolar epithelial cells with proliferation and apoptosis, as well as partly reversible lung fibrosis. We found myofibroblasts arranged in fibroblastic foci, together with evidence for EMT. Fibroblast proliferation occurred delayed as compared to epithelial changes. Fibrotic pathology significantly declined after day 14, the reversal being associated with an increase of the epithelial protective element fibroblast growth factor 10 (FGF10). Our data indicate that Gremlin-mediated BMP inhibition results in activation of epithelial cells and transient fibrosis, but also induction of epithelium protective FGF10. A Gremlin-BMP-FGF10 loop may explain these results, and demonstrate that the interaction between different factors are quite complex in fibrotic lung disease. Increased Gremlin expression in human IPF tissue may be an expression of continuing epithelial injury, and Gremlin may be part of activated repair mechanisms.
  OBJECTIVE: /st> To determine serum levels of interleukin 27 (IL-27) in patients with systemic sclerosis (SSc) and relate the results to the clinical features of SSc. METHODS: /st> Serum levels of IL-27 in 91 patients with SSc and the production of IL-27 by isolated monocytes were examined by ELISA. The expression of IL-27 receptor in the skin fibroblasts, B cells and T cells was quantified by real-time PCR. The effect of IL-27 on immunoglobulin G (IgG) production of B cells, IL-17 production of CD4 T cells and proliferation and collagen synthesis of fibroblasts was also analysed. RESULTS: /st> Serum IL-27 levels were raised in patients with SSc compared with healthy controls and correlated positively with the extent of skin and pulmonary fibrosis and immunological abnormalities. IL-27 levels also correlated positively with serum levels of hyaluronan, recently identified as an endogenous ligand for Toll-like receptors. The retrospective longitudinal analysis showed a tendency for serum IL-27 levels to be attenuated during the follow-up period. IL-27 production by cultured monocytes was increased by hyaluronan stimulation. IL-27 receptor expression was upregulated in the affected skin fibroblasts, B cells and CD4 T cells of patients with SSc. Moreover, IL-27 stimulation increased IgG production of B cells, IL-17 production of CD4 T cells and proliferation and collagen synthesis of fibroblasts in patients with SSc compared with those in healthy controls. CONCLUSION: /st> These results suggest that IL-27 and its signalling in B cells, T cells and fibroblasts contributes to disease development in patients with SSc.
  Current evidence suggests that the keratinocyte growth factor (KGF) and the polymorphonuclear leukocyte may play key roles in the development of lung fibrosis. Here we describe the construction, expression, purification, and identification of a novel NIF (neutrophil inhibitory factor)-KGF mutant fusion protein (NKM). The fusion gene was ligated via a flexible octapeptide hinge and expressed as an insoluble protein in Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3). The fusion protein retained the activities of KGF and NIF, as it inhibited both fibroblast proliferation and leukocyte adhesion. Next, the effects of NKM on bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis in mice were examined. The mice were divided into the following four groups: (i) saline group; (ii) bleomycin group (instilled with 5 mg/kg bleomycin intratracheally); (iii) bleomycin plus dexamethasone (Dex) group (Dex was given intraperitoneally (i.p.) at 1 mg/kg/day 2 days prior to bleomycin instillation and daily after bleomycin instillation until the end of the treatment); and (iv) bleomycin plus NKM group (NKM was given i.p. at 2 mg/kg/day using the same protocol as the Dex group). NKM significantly improved the survival rates of mice exposed to bleomycin. The marked morphological changes and increased hydroxyproline levels resulted from the instillation of bleomycin (on Day 17) in the lungs were significantly inhibited by NKM. These results revealed that NKM can attenuate bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis, suggesting that NKM could be used to prevent bleomycin-induced lung damage or other interstitial pulmonary fibrosis.
  INTRODUCTION: Sarcoidosis is a disease of unknown etiology. Little is known of predictive factors of fibrosis. It was suggested that PAI-1, uPA, TGF-beta1, VEGF, IL-8, TNF-alpha influence this process. Aims: To assess airway inflammatory and fibrosis markers in EBC in sarcoidosis and the effect of fiberoptic bronchoscopy (FOB), bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF), transbronchial lung biopsy (TBLB) and bronchial mucosa membrane biopsy on their production in the airways. MATERIAL AND METHODS: The study group consisted of 11 patients (5 women, 6 men; mean age 40 +/- 9 yrs, mean +/- SD) with sarcoidosis stage I-III. PAI-1 (ng/ml), uPA (ng/ml), TGF-beta1 (pg/ml), VEGF (pg/ml), IL-8 (pg/ml), TNF-alpha (pg/ml) levels were measured in BALF and EBC collected before and 48 hours after FOB. Results: No significant changes in EBC levels of VEGF, PAI-1, TGF-beta1, TNF-alpha (respectively: 8.02 +/- 4.97 pg/ml; 1.1 +/- 1.2 ng/ml; 2909.7 +/- 206.6 pg/ml; 10.7 +/- 19.9 pg/ml) after FOB were observed when compared to baseline. In contrast, IL-8 concentration in EBC (pg/ml) decreased after FOB (0.073 +/- 0.13 v. 0.061 +/- 0.1, p = 0.006) and was significantly lower than in BALF (BALF 0.95 +/- 0.62, p < 0.05). Also, mean level of VEGF was higher in BALF than in EBC both pre- and post- FOB (BALF 66.38 +/- 36.95, EBC pre-FOB 6.75 +/- 3.67 and EBC post-FOB 8.02 +/- 4.97). Significant relationship between TNF-alpha in post-FOB EBC and BALF was also shown (b = 0.63, p = 0.04). CONCLUSIONS: FOB does not significantly affect levels of airway inflammation and fibrosis markers present in EBC before and after FOB; they were also comparable to the concentrations marked by BALF. The lack of correlation between markers levels in EBC and BALF indicates that these methods are not equivalent. Due to repeatibility, and less invasive, simple method of EBC test it seems reasonable to continue the research on the larger number of patients.
  Microvascular damage and dysfunction represent the earliest morphological and functional markers of systemic sclerosis (SSc), a progressive connective tissue disease characterized by vascular abnormalities and diffuse fibrosis in the skin and internal organs. These early microvascular changes are clinically mirrored by Raynaud phenomenon, which can be primary (idiopathic) or secondary to several different conditions including SSc. Morphological and functional assessment of the cutaneous microvasculature have crucial implications for diagnosis, prognosis and therapy in SSc and secondary Raynaud phenomenon. Most importantly, imaging with nailfold videocapillaroscopy (NVC) enables the early differentiation between primary and secondary Raynaud phenomenon by identifying morphological patterns specific to various stages of SSc ('early', 'active' and 'late' patterns); the inclusion of these NVC patterns could increase the sensitivity of classification criteria for SSc. Findings on NVC are also markers of SSc severity and progression, as reduced capillary density has been associated with a high risk of developing digital skin ulcers and pulmonary arterial hypertension. Laser Doppler imaging and thermal imaging demonstrate the dysfunctional cutaneous blood flow in response to cold stimuli. Therapies targeting underlying vascular disease in SSc have been successfully designed to improve the symptoms of Raynaud phenomenon and to reduce ischemic injury to involved organs, and NVC patterns have been found to improve following targeted therapy; however, treatment of later fibrosis remains a challenge.
  Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) infection can cause the development of severe end-stage lung disease characterized by acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and pulmonary fibrosis. The mechanisms by which pulmonary lesions and fibrosis are generated during SARS-CoV infection are not known. Using high-throughput mRNA profiling, we examined the transcriptional response of wild-type (WT), type I interferon receptor knockout (IFNAR1-/-), and STAT1 knockout (STAT1-/-) mice infected with a recombinant mouse-adapted SARS-CoV (rMA15) to better understand the contribution of specific gene expression changes to disease progression. Despite a deletion of the type I interferon receptor, strong expression of interferon-stimulated genes was observed in the lungs of IFNAR1-/- mice, contributing to clearance of the virus. In contrast, STAT1-/- mice exhibited a defect in the expression of interferon-stimulated genes and were unable to clear the infection, resulting in a lethal outcome. STAT1-/- mice exhibited dysregulation of T-cell and macrophage differentiation, leading to a TH2-biased immune response and the development of alternatively activated macrophages that mediate a profibrotic environment within the lung. We propose that a combination of impaired viral clearance and T-cell/macrophage dysregulation causes the formation of prefibrotic lesions in the lungs of rMA15-infected STAT1-/- mice.
  Objectives. SSc is a systemic CTD characterized by fibrosis in skin and internal organs. Interstitial lung disease is a frequent complication with fibrosis in the lung parenchyma. The fibrotic process is believed to be influenced by leukotrienes (LTs) and also by oxidative stress. The aim of this study was to investigate the amount of LTs and 8-isoprostane, a marker of oxidative stress, in exhaled breath condensate (EBC) from SSc patients. Methods. Twenty-two SSc patients with median disease duration of 2.1 years were investigated. Fifteen patients had lcSSc, four patients had dcSSc and three patients only fulfilled criteria for limited SSc. Sixteen healthy controls were enrolled. Cysteinyl-LTs (CysLTs), LTB(4) and 8-isoprostane were measured in EBC with EIA and related to the radiologic extent of pulmonary fibrosis. Results. Compared with controls, SSc patients displayed higher median (interquartile range) CysLT [6.1 (5.3-6.8) vs 4.9 (3.7-6.3) pg/ml; P = 0.040], 8-isoprostane [0.23 (0.20-0.46) vs 0.19 (0.12-0.20) pg/ml; P = 0.0020], but similar levels of LTB(4) [0.70 (0.50-0.83) vs 0.60 (0.42-0.70) pg/ml]. CysLT correlated to LTB(4), while 8-isoprostane did not correlate to any of the LTs. None of the biomarkers measured in EBC correlated to radiologic findings. Conclusion. Increased levels of CysLT and 8-isoprostane in EBC from patients with SSc reflect the inflammatory pattern involving LTs as well as oxidative stress. These findings may indicate a possible non-invasive assessment of pulmonary involvement in SSc with a potential value for assessment of disease progress and therapy evaluation.
  Sclerosing rhabdomyosarcoma (SRMS) is an infrequent variant of rhabdomyosarcoma characterized by extensive intercellular hyaline fibrosis. We report the case of a 37 year-old male with a 9 x 6 cm SRMS on the right elbow. Histologically, the tumor showed an abundant extracellular hyaline matrix with extratumoral vascular emboli and microscopic foci of fusocellular embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (FRMS) separated by a fibrotic band from the sclerosing areas. One year later the patient presented with a right intratesticular tumor of 1.2 x 0.8 cm, which was reported as pure FRMS. Immunohistochemically, SRMS was positive only for MyoD1 and Vimentin and negative for Myogenin and Desmin. Both the elbow emboli with the extratumoral foci of FRMS and the intratesticular tumor were positive for Myogenin, MyoD1, Vimentin and Desmin. Using fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH), the SRMS and the FRMS tumor cells of the elbow and the FRMS tumor cells of the testis were found to be negative for FOXO1A translocation in chromosome 13. PCR chimeric transcriptional products PAX3-FKHR and PAX7-FKHR were not found. Six months following testicular resection, the patient died of multiple metastases in the mediastinum, lung and right thigh.
  The aim of this comparative study was to investigate the development of clinical signs and accompanying haematological, coproscopic and pathological findings as a basis for the monitoring of health condition of Angiostrongylus vasorum infected dogs. Six beagles were orally inoculated with 50 (n = 3) or 500 (n = 3) A. vasorum third stage larvae (L3) obtained from experimentally infected Biomphalaria glabrata snails. Two dogs were treated with moxidectin/imidacloprid spot-on solution and two further dogs with an oral experimental compound 92 days post infection (dpi), and were necropsied 166 dpi. Two untreated control dogs were necropsied 97 dpi. Prepatency was 47-49 days. Dogs inoculated with 500 L3 exhibited earlier (from 42 dpi) and more severe respiratory signs. Clinical signs resolved 12 days after treatment and larval excretion stopped within 20 days in all four treated dogs. Upon necropsy, 10 and 170 adult worms were recovered from the untreated dogs inoculated with 50 and 500 L3, respectively. Adult worms were also found in two treated dogs, in the absence of L1 or eggs. Despite heavy A. vasorum infection load and severe pulmonary changes including vascular thrombosis, only mild haematological changes were observed. Eosinophilia was absent but the presence of plasma cells was observed. Neutrophilic leucocytes showed a transient increase but only after treatment. Signs for coagulopathies were slight; nevertheless coagulation parameters were inoculation dose dependent. Ten weeks after treatment pulmonary fibrosis was still present. Infections starting from 50 L3 of A. vasorum had a massive impact on lung tissues and therefore on the health of affected dogs, particularly after prepatency, although only mild haematological abnormalities were evident.
  Bronchiectasis is defined as an abnormal persistent bronchial dilatation usually associated with inflammation in the bronchial tree and lung parenchyma. The disease remains a common cause of significant morbidity and mortality, especially when associated with hereditary disorders such as cystic fibrosis, ciliary dyskinesia, and immunodeficiency states. Computed tomography is now the diagnostic modality of choice and may also contribute to clinical management, suggesting some etiologic causes. We highlight developments in classification, physiopathology and radiology of this debilitating disease.
  BACKGROUND: Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) plays a well-recognised pathogenic role in cystic fibrosis (CF). AIMS: To evaluate the prevalence and incidence of colonisation by MRSA, clinical impact of MRSA colonisation (year after first MRSA isolation), risk factors and pattern of antimicrobial resistance. Methods: Retrospective review of paediatric CF patients colonised with MRSA followed-up at the CF Unit of Hospital de Santa Maria 2003-2007. RESULTS: Twelve of the 60 patients followed-up during this period were MRSA-positive at some time (chronic colonisation in 3 patients). Mean age at acquisition was 9 years 10 months and mean time interval between CF diagnosis and MRSA acquisition 5 years 7 months. An important rise in MRSA colonisation prevalence and incidence was observed, with the highest rate seen in 2007 (prevalence 14.3% and incidence 8.9%). Four patients had received anti-staphylococcal prophylaxis with flucloxacillin. An increase in the total number of in-patient days was observed in four patients (two with chronic colonisation). Deterioration in lung function was seen in five patients (including the three patients with chronic colonisation). Only one patient had a decrease in body mass index percentile. Resistance to clindamycin and rifampin was the most frequently seen. CONCLUSIONS: This study revealed significant clinical deterioration in patients with chronic colonisation by MRSA, reinforcing the importance of effective and timely decolonisation strategies.
  Accidental exposure by inhalation to alpha-emitting particles from mixed oxide (MOX: uranium and plutonium oxide) fuels is a potential long-term health risk to workers in nuclear fuel fabrication plants. For MOX fuels, the risk of lung cancer development may be different from that assigned to individual components (plutonium, uranium) given different physico-chemical characteristics. The objective of this study was to investigate late effects in rat lungs following inhalation of MOX aerosols of similar particle size containing 2.5 or 7.1% plutonium. Conscious rats were exposed to MOX aerosols and kept for their entire lifespan. Different initial lung burdens (ILBs) were obtained using different amounts of MOX. Lung total alpha activity was determined by external counting and at autopsy for total lung dose calculation. Fixed lung tissue was used for anatomopathological, autoradiographical, and immunohistochemical analyses. Inhalation of MOX at ILBs ranging from 1-20 kBq resulted in lung pathologies (90% of rats) including fibrosis (70%) and malignant lung tumors (45%). High ILBs (4-20 kBq) resulted in reduced survival time (N = 102; p < 0.05) frequently associated with lung fibrosis. Malignant tumor incidence increased linearly with dose (up to 60 Gy) with a risk of 1-1.6% Gy for MOX, similar to results for industrial plutonium oxide alone (1.9% Gy). Staining with antibodies against Surfactant Protein-C, Thyroid Transcription Factor-1, or Oct-4 showed differential labeling of tumor types. In conclusion, late effects following MOX inhalation result in similar risk for development of lung tumors as compared with industrial plutonium oxide.
  Background: Exhaled breath condensate (EBC) has been used for diagnosing and monitoring respiratory disorders. For clinical purposes the assessment of easy-to-obtain nonspecific markers seems particularly interesting. Objectives: As these measures are related to each other, our objective was to extract the independent information in global EBC markers across a range of respiratory disorders. Methods: EBC was collected from patients with asthma (n = 18), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (n = 17), and cystic fibrosis (n = 46), as well as from lung transplant (LTX) recipients (n = 14) and healthy controls (n = 26). Samples were assessed for electrical conductivity, ammonia, pH, and nitrite/nitrate. pH was measured after both deaeration with argon and CO(2) standardization. Additionally, the fraction of exhaled nitric oxide (FE(NO)) was assessed. Factor analysis was applied to identify major factors concerning these measures. Results: Three independent factors were detected; the first comprised conductivity, ammonia, and pH, especially when standardized using CO(2), the second nitrite/nitrate, and the third FE(NO). Conductivity and ammonia were highly correlated (r = 0.968; p < 0.001). FE(NO) provided independent information mainly in asthma. The nonspecific EBC markers showed considerable overlap between patient groups and healthy subjects. However, conductivity, ammonia, pH standardized for CO(2) and nitrite/nitrate were increased in LTX recipients compared to healthy controls (p < 0.05 each). Conclusions: A panel of nonspecific easy-to-obtain exhaled breath markers could be reduced to 3 independent factors. The information content of conductivity, ammonia, and pH after CO(2) equilibration appeared to be similar, while FE(NO) was independent. The increased levels of these biomarkers in LTX might indicate a potential for their use in these patients.
  The small airways of the human lung undergo pathological changes in pulmonary disorders, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), asthma, bronchiolitis obliterans and cystic fibrosis. These clinical problems impose huge personal and societal healthcare burdens. The changes, termed 'pathological airway remodeling', affect the epithelium, the underlying mesenchyme and the reciprocal trophic interactions that occur between these tissues. Most of the normal human airway is lined by a pseudostratified epithelium of ciliated cells, secretory cells and 6-30% basal cells, the proportion of which varies along the proximal-distal axis. Epithelial abnormalities range from hypoplasia (failure to differentiate) to basal- and goblet-cell hyperplasia, squamous- and goblet-cell metaplasia, dysplasia and malignant transformation. Mesenchymal alterations include thickening of the basal lamina, smooth muscle hyperplasia, fibrosis and inflammatory cell accumulation. Paradoxically, given the prevalence and importance of airway remodeling in lung disease, its etiology is poorly understood. This is due, in part, to a lack of basic knowledge of the mechanisms that regulate the differentiation, maintenance and repair of the airway epithelium. Specifically, little is known about the proliferation and differentiation of basal cells, a multipotent stem cell population of the pseudostratified airway epithelium. This Perspective summarizes what we know, and what we need to know, about airway basal cells to evaluate their contributions to normal and abnormal airway remodeling. We contend that exploiting well-described model systems using both human airway epithelial cells and the pseudostratified epithelium of the genetically tractable mouse trachea will enable crucial discoveries regarding the pathogenesis of airway disease.
  Respiratory disease is the main cause of morbidity and mortality in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). In particular, patients suffer from chronic infection due to biofilm formation by opportunistic Pseudomonas aeruginosa (32). Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop alternative ways to treat biofilm-associated clinical infections. The aim of this study was to compare the antimicrobial effects in vitro of the combinations tobramycin-clarithromycin and tobramycin-azithromycin against five P. aeruginosa biofilms and to establish the most effective combination. We performed a kinetic study over a period of 28 days of a twice-daily coadministration of the combinations tobramycin-clarithromycin and tobramycin-azithromycin on 12-day-old, mature P. aeruginosa biofilms formed on microplate pegs for 4 clinical isolates and one laboratory strain (PAO1) to simulate the treatment of CF patients with tobramycin inhalation solution (TOBI) through aerosolization. A synergy between tobramycin and clarithromycin was recorded for 3/5 biofilms, with a bacterial decrease of more than 5 log. Conversely, we found an antagonistic activity when 4 μg/ml tobramycin was administered with azithromycin at 2 μg/ml for P. aeruginosa PAO1 and with azithromycin at 2, 20, 50, 100, and 200 μg/ml for P. aeruginosa PYO1. Treatment with tobramycin at 4 μg/ml combined with clarithromycin at 200 μg/ml eradicated all five biofilms, while tobramycin-azithromycin at the same concentrations eradicated only three biofilms. Results of this study suggest that local administration of tobramycin and clarithromycin into the respiratory tract represents a better strategy than the combination tobramycin-azithromycin for the treatment of P. aeruginosa-associated pulmonary infections.
  A hallmark of airways in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) is highly refractory, chronic infections by several opportunistic bacterial pathogens. A recent study demonstrated that acidified sodium nitrite (A-NO(2)(-)) killed the highly refractory mucoid form of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, a pathogen that significantly compromises lung function in CF patients (S. S. Yoon et al., J. Clin. Invest. 116:436-446, 2006). Therefore, the microbicidal activity of A-NO(2)(-) (pH 6.5) against the following three major CF pathogens was assessed: P. aeruginosa (a mucoid, mucA22 mutant and a sequenced nonmucoid strain, PAO1), Staphylococcus aureus USA300 (methicillin resistant), and Burkholderia cepacia, a notoriously antibiotic-resistant organism. Under planktonic, anaerobic conditions, growth of all strains except for P. aeruginosa PAO1 was inhibited by 7.24 mM (512 μg ml(-1) NO(2)(-)). B. cepacia was particularly sensitive to low concentrations of A-NO(2)(-) (1.81 mM) under planktonic conditions. In antibiotic-resistant communities known as biofilms, which are reminiscent of end-stage CF airway disease, A-NO(2)(-) killed mucoid P. aeruginosa, S. aureus, and B. cepacia; 1 to 2 logs of cells were killed after a 2-day incubation with a single dose of ∼15 mM A-NO(2)(-). Animal toxicology and phase I human trials indicate that these bactericidal levels of A-NO(2)(-) can be easily attained by aerosolization. Thus, in summary, we demonstrate that A-NO(2)(-) is very effective at killing these important CF pathogens and could be effective in other infectious settings, particularly under anaerobic conditions where bacterial defenses against the reduction product of A-NO(2)(-), nitric oxide (NO), are dramatically reduced.
  Biological responses of multi-wall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) were assessed after a single intratracheal instillation in rats. The diameter and median length of the MWCNTs used in this study were approximately 60 nm and 1.5 μm, respectively. Groups of male Sprague-Dawley rats were intratracheally instilled with 0.04, 0.2, or 1 mg/kg of the individually dispersed MWCNT suspension. After instillation, the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid was assessed for inflammatory cells and markers, and the lung, liver, kidney, spleen, and cerebrum were histopathologically evaluated at 3-day, 1-week, 1-month, 3-month, and 6-month post-exposure. Transient pulmonary inflammatory responses were observed only in the lungs of the group of rats exposed to 1 mg/kg of MWCNTs. Morphology of the instilled MWCNTs in the lungs of rats was assessed using light microscopy and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Light microscopy examination revealed that MWCNTs deposited in the lungs of the rats were typically phagocytosed by the alveolar macrophages and these macrophages were consequently accumulated in the alveoli until 6-month post-exposure. The 400 TEM images obtained showed that all MWCNTs were located in the alveolar macrophages or macrophages in the interstitial tissues, and MWCNTs were not located in the cells of the interstitial tissues. There was no evidence of chronic inflammation, such as angiogenesis or fibrosis, induced by MWCNT instillation. These results suggest that MWCNTs were being processed and cleared by alveolar macrophages.
  BACKGROUND: We assessed the relationship between physiologic parameters, computed tomography patterns, 6 minute walk distance (6MWD) and the distance-saturation product [DSP; defined as the product of the 6MWD and the lowest oxygen saturation during the 6 minute walk test (6MWT)]. In addition, we investigated factors affecting 6MWD in patients with pulmonary sarcoidosis. METHODS: We performed a retrospective study of patient demographics, treatment, pulmonary function, 6MWT, echocardiography and computed tomography results. RESULTS: Fifty nine patients were included in this study. Their mean+standard deviation age was 47.5 years + 12.5 years, and 42 (71.2%) were female. Mean pulmonary function parameters for forced vital capacity (FVC), forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) and total lung capacity (TLC) results, as percentages of predicted values, were 77.6 +/- 22.2, 77.1 +/- 22.8 and 78.7 +/- 16.1, respectively. Comparison of the DSP with distance walked revealed a significant correlation with factors underlying reduced 6MWD, including gender, pulmonary function indices, partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2), and Borg dyspnea score. Other factors were significantly associated with DSP but not distance; these included lung fibrosis (p = 0.02), pulmonary hypertension (p = 0.01) and systemic therapy (p = 0.04). Backward elimination stepwise multiple regression analysis revealed that gender, and FEV1 were independent predictors of 6MWD, but FEV1 was more strongly related when DSP applied [DSP, R2 = 0.53, p = 0.02; distance, R2 = 0.45, p < 0.0001]. CONCLUSION: Our findings reveal that, compared to 6MWD alone, the DSP is correlated with a greater number of factors associated with reduced 6MWT performance. Therefore, the DSP may be a useful indicator of functional status in patients with sarcoidosis. Additional large-scale studies are warranted to validate our findings.
  Background Peritoneal fibrosis manifests clinically as membrane failure or encapsulating peritoneal sclerosis (EPS). There are no clinical or biochemical tests to determine the rate of progression of peritoneal fibrosis. CCL18/pulmonary and activation-regulated chemokine (PARC) is profibrotic and stimulates collagen production independent of the effect of transforming growth factor beta. This has not been studied in peritoneal dialysis (PD) patients. Materials and methods We have prospectively studied 106 patients, free from infection/recent peritonitis. A high concentration of CCL18 was discovered by multiplex antibody arrays and quantified by ELISA. Serum and dialysate levels were examined for their prognostic values. Results By multiple regression analysis, dialysate CCL18 (6.76 +/- 0.66 mug 4 h(-1)) correlated with increasing membrane transport status (TS) (P < 0.0001) and total glucose exposure/24 h (P = 0.033). Serum CCL18 correlated with high TS (P = 0.0001) and duration of PD (P = 0.001). After 12 months of follow-up, 57 patients remained on PD while 12 patients were transferred to haemodialysis (HD) and seven developed EPS. Patients who subsequently developed EPS had higher baseline dialysate CCL18 (11.5 +/- 3.6 mug 4 h(-1) vs. 5.6 +/- 0.82 mug 4 h(-1), P = 0.03) and serum CCL18 (156.9 +/- 12.8 ng mL(-1) vs. 124.8 +/- 12.2 ng mL(-1), P = 0.02) compared with the stable PD group. Conclusion This is the first report of high levels of CCL18 in the spent dialysate and serum from long-term PD patients. These levels correlated with dysfunction of peritoneal membrane transport status, therefore following CCL18 in a longitudinal study may be of interest.
  A defective mucociliary clearance facilitates colonization with bacteria and fungal spores in cystic fibrosis patients. Yeasts and molds are cultured from the cystic fibrosis respiratory tract and often their clinical relevance is unknown. Candida spp. are the most commonly isolated yeasts, whereas Aspergillus spp., Scedosporium apiospermum, as well as Exophiala dermatitidis in some countries, are the most frequent molds recovered from respiratory specimens. Molecular biotyping studies have revealed that some fungal genotypes are capable of chronically colonizing the airways. Persistent Aspergillus fumigatus infection is associated with an increased risk of pulmonary exacerbations requiring hospitalization. The prevalence of non-Aspergillus molds may be underestimated due to overgrowth of Pseudomonas and Aspergillus spp. on routine media. Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis is usually treated by oral steroids and an antifungal azole drug. Interactions with the co-medication have to be considered. A small number of antifungal pharmacokinetic studies indicate a high inter-subject variability for itraconazole, voriconazole and posaconazole, and therefore therapeutic drug monitoring is recommended.
  The pathological response and translocation of a commercial chrysotile product similar to that which was used through the mid-1970s in a joint compound intended for sealing the interface between adjacent wall boards was evaluated in comparison to amosite asbestos. This study was unique in that it presents a combined real-world exposure and was the first study to investigate whether there were differences between chrysotile and amosite asbestos fibers in time course, size distribution, and pathological response in the pleural cavity. Rats were exposed by inhalation 6 h/day for 5 days to either sanded joint compound consisting of both chrysotile fibers and sanded joint compound particles (CSP) or amosite asbestos. Subgroups were examined through 1-year postexposure. No pathological response was observed at any time point in the CSP-exposure group. The long chrysotile fibers (L > 20 microm) cleared rapidly (T(1/2) of 4.5 days) and were not observed in the pleural cavity. In contrast, a rapid inflammatory response occurred in the lung following exposure to amosite resulting in Wagner grade 4 interstitial fibrosis within 28 days. Long amosite fibers had a T(1/2) > 1000 days and were observed in the pleural cavity within 7 days postexposure. By 90 days the long amosite fibers were associated with a marked inflammatory response on the parietal pleural. This study provides support that CSP following inhalation would not initiate an inflammatory response in the lung, and that the chrysotile fibers present do not migrate to, or cause an inflammatory response in the pleural cavity, the site of mesothelioma formation.
  INTRODUCTION: In the pathogenesis of diffuse parenchymal lung diseases (DPLDs), growth factors, including transforming growth factor beta1 (TGF-beta1), are responsible for cell proliferation, apoptosis, chemotaxis, and angiogenesis, and also for the production and secretion of some components of the extracellular matrix. OBJECTIVES: The aim of the study was to evaluate correlations in DPLDs between TGF-beta1 levels in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid and high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) score. PATIENTS AND METHODS: The study was performed in 31 DPLD patients in whom a selection of lung segments with high and low intensity of abnormalities was estimated by HRCT score. All patients underwent BAL with TGF-beta1 measured by an enzyme immunoassay in BAL fluid and video-assisted thoracic surgery lung biopsy from both selected segments. RESULTS: All 31 patients were diagnosed, and based on histopathology, they were classified into 2 groups: idiopathic interstitial pneumonia (usual interstitial pneumonia - 12, nonspecific inter stitial pneumonia - 2, cryptogenic organizing pneumonia - 2, and desquamative interstitial pneumonia - 1) and granulomatous disease (sarcoidosis - 7, extrinsic allergic alveolitis - 5, and histiocytosis X - 2). The final analysis was performed in 28 patients who showed nonhomogenous distribution on HRCT. TGF-beta1 levels in BAL fluid were significantly higher in the areas with high intensity of abnormalities assessed by HRCT score (P = 0.018, analysis of variance). These levels were not different between the groups, but a trend towards higher levels in idiopathic inter stitial pneumonia was observed. CONCLUSIONS: The results confirm that TGF-beta1 may be a good but not specific marker of fibrosis in DPLDs. A significant positive correlation between TGF-beta1 levels in BAL fluid and the HRCT score was observed.
  PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The term 'pulmonary fibrosis' encompasses a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by replacement of the lung parenchyma with scar tissue. Despite many years of research, its pathogenesis remains obscure and a cure remains elusive. The bulk of human data in this area derive from patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Pulmonary fibrosis has also emerged as a leading cause of mortality in patients with systemic sclerosis. Because of a lack of effective therapy, better understanding of the mechanism(s) driving this disease has the potential to impact the proximate cause of death in most patients with scleroderma. RECENT FINDINGS: Animal modeling and translational human studies lend insight into the pathogenesis of lung fibrosis. Recent developments include the role of epithelial cell injury, endoplasmic reticulum stress and Wnt signaling, the contributions of alternatively activated macrophages and efferocytosis, the extra-mesenchymal origin of fibroblasts including epithelial-mesenchymal transition and fibrocytes, a possible association with senescence and aging, and the emerging role of lymphocytes in the fibrotic response. SUMMARY: Novel investigations defining the mechanism of epithelial cell injury, alternative macrophage activation and efferocytosis, alternate sources of fibroblasts, cellular senescence, and lymphocyte function may lend new insight into the pathogenesis of scleroderma-related pulmonary fibrosis.
  PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Progressive organ fibrosis and pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) are the leading causes of death in patients with systemic sclerosis (SSc). However, the pathogenesis and the link between these two processes remain obscure. A better understanding of these events is needed in order to facilitate the discovery and development of effective therapies for SSc. RECENT FINDINGS: Recent reports provide evidence that the orphan receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPARγ), better known for its pivotal role in metabolism, has potent effects on inflammation, fibrogenesis and vascular remodeling and is important in the pathogenesis of fibrosis and PAH, and as a potential therapeutic target in SSc. The studies discussed in this review indicate that ligands of PPARγ potently modulate connective tissue turnover and suggest that aberrant expression or function of PPARγ is associated with, and very likely contributes to, the progression of pathological fibrosis and vascular remodeling. These observations are of particularly relevance because FDA-approved drugs of the thiazolidinedione class currently used for the treatment of obesity-associated type 2 diabetes activate PPARγ signaling. Moreover, novel PPARγ ligands with selective activity are under development or in clinical trials for inflammatory diseases, asthma, Alzheimer disease and cancer. SUMMARY: Drugs targeting the PPARγ pathway might be effective for the control of fibrosis as well as pathological vascular remodeling underlying PAH and, therefore, might have a therapeutic potential in SSc. A greater understanding of the mechanisms underlying the antifibrogenic and vascular remodeling activities of PPARγ ligands will be necessary in order to advance these drugs into clinical use.
  The histopathology of idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis (IPF) includes the presence of myofibroblasts within so called fibroblastic foci, and studies suggest lung myofibroblasts may be derived from epithelial cells through epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). TGF-beta1 is expressed and/or activated in fibrogenesis and induces EMT in lung epithelial cells in a dose dependent manner. A higher occurrence of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) has been reported in the lung tissue of IPF patients. EBV expresses latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) during the latent phase of infection and may play a role in the pathogenesis of pulmonary fibrosis inasmuch as LMP-1 may act as a constitutively active TNF-alpha receptor. Our data show a remarkable increase in mesenchymal cell markers along with a concurrent reduction in the expression of epithelial cell markers in lung epithelial cells co-treated with LMP-1 and very low doses of TGF-beta1. This effect was mirrored in lung epithelial cells infected with EBV expressing LMP1 and co-treated with TGF-beta1. LMP1 pro-EMT signaling was identified and occurs primarily through the NF-kappaB pathway and secondarily through the ERK pathway. Activation of the ERK pathway was shown to be critical for aspects of TGF-beta1 induced EMT. LMP1 accentuates the TGF-beta1 activation of ERK. Together these data demonstrate that the presence of EBV-LMP1 in lung epithelial cells synergizes with TGF-beta1 to induce EMT. Our in vitro data may help explain the observation that IPF patients demonstrating positive staining for LMP-1 in lung epithelial cells have a more rapid demise than patients in whom LMP-1 is not detected.
  Chronic lung colonization with Pseudomonas aeruginosa is anticipated in cystic fibrosis (CF). Abnormal terminal glycosylation has been implicated as a candidate for this condition. We previously reported a down-regulation of mannose-6-phosphate isomerase (MPI) for core N-glycan production in the CFTR defective human cell line (IB3). Currently, we revealed a 40% decrease in N-glycosylation of IB3 cells compared to CFTR corrected human cell line (S9) along with a 3-fold lower surface attachment of P. aeruginosa strain PAO1. There was a 2-fold increase in intra-cellular bacteria in S9 cells compared to IB3 cells. Following a 4 hr clearance period, intra-cellular bacteria in IB3 cells increased 2-fold. Comparatively, a 2-fold decrease in intra-cellular bacteria occurred in S9 cells. Gene augmentation in IB3 cells with hMPI or hCFTR reversed these IB3 deficiencies. Mannose-6-phosphate can be produced from external mannose independent of MPI, and correction in the IB3 clearance deficiencies was observed when cultured in mannose rich medium. An in vivo model for P. aeruginosa colonization in the upper airways revealed an increased bacterial burden in the trachea and oropharynx of non-therapeutic CF mice compared to mice treated either with an intra-tracheal delivery of adeno-associated viral vector (AAV5) expressing murine MPI or a hyper-mannose water diet. Finally, a modest lung inflammatory response was observed in CF mice and was partially corrected by both treatments. Augmenting N-glycosylation to attenuate colonization of P. aeruginosa in CF airways reveals a new therapeutic avenue for a hallmark disease condition in CF.
  This study tests the hypothesis that bone marrow-derived mononuclear cell (BMDMC) therapy may reduce lung inflammation and fibrosis leading to an improvement in respiratory mechanics in a murine model of silicosis. Fifty-two female C57BL/6 mice were randomly assigned into four groups. In SIL group, silica suspension (SiO2; 20 mg/50 mul in saline) was intratracheally (i.t.) instilled and in C animals, saline (50 mul i.t.) was administered. At one hour, C and SIL groups were further randomized receiving BMDMC (2x10(6), intravenously) (C-Cell and SIL-Cell) or saline (50 mul, i.v.) (C and SIL). BMDMC were obtained from male donor mice. At day 15, lung mechanics, histology, the presence of Y chromosome, interleukin (IL)-1betaIL-1alpha, interleukin-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1RN), interleukin-1 receptor type 1 (IL-1R1), transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta and caspase-3 mRNA expressions in lung tissue were analysed. In SIL-Cell group, the fraction area of granuloma, the number of macrophages, and collagen fibre content were reduced yielding improved lung mechanics. The presence of male donor cells in lung tissue was not confirmed using detection of Y chromosome DNA. Nevertheless, caspase-3, IL-1betaIL-1alpha, IL-1RN, and TGF-beta mRNA expression diminished after cell therapy. In conclusion, BMDMC acted on inflammatory and fibrogenic processes improving lung function through paracrine effects.
  Outcome measures to assess therapeutic interventions in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients with mild lung disease are lacking. Our aim was to determine if the Lung Clearance Index (LCI) can detect a treatment response to dornase alfa in paediatric CF patients with normal spirometry. CF patients between 6 and 18 years of age with FEV1% >/=80% predicted were eligible. In a crossover design, 17 patients received 4 weeks of dornase alfa and placebo in a randomized sequence separated by a 4-weekwashout period. The primary endpoint was the change in LCI from dornase alfa versus placebo. A mixed model approach incorporating period-dependent baselines was used. This trial was registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00557089. The mean age+/-SD was 10.32+/-3.35 years. Dornase alfa improved LCI versus placebo (0.90+/-1.44, p=0.022). A significant improvement in LCI occurred in seven of the seventeen subjects. Small airways flows as measured by forced expiratory flow at 25-75% expired volume (FEF25-75) measured by percent predicted and z-scores also improved in subjects on dornase alfa (6.1%+/-10.34, p=0.03; and 0.28 z-score+/-0.46, p=0.03). Dornase alfa significantly improved LCI. Therefore the LCI may be a suitable tool to assess early intervention strategies in this patient population.
  Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Pa) is the predominant organism infecting the airways of patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). This organism has an armamentarium of survival mechanisms that allows it to survive in the CF airway. Since colonization and chronic infection with Pa is associated with poorer lung function and increased morbidity and mortality, therapies that can prevent infection could significantly improve the lives of patients with CF. Numerous studies have examined the effects of treatment on the eradication of Pa as a means to ameliorate disease. This article outlines the pathophysiology and clinical implication of Pa acquisition, and reviews the existing treatment regimens aimed at early eradication of Pa in patients with CF.
  In the last 45 years, lung transplantation has evolved from its status as a rare extreme form of surgical therapy for the treatment of advanced lung diseases to an accepted therapeutic option for select patients. Although pulmonary fibrosis and pulmonary vascular diseases are important indications for lung transplantation, only a small percentage of transplants are performed in patients with collagen vascular diseases. The reasons for this low number are multifactorial. This article reviews issues relevant to all lung transplant candidates and recipients as well as those specific to patients with autoimmune diseases.
  Ankylosing spondylitis, a chronic multisystem inflammatory disorder, can present with articular and extra-articular features. It can affect the tracheobronchial tree and the lung parenchyma, and respiratory complications include chest wall restriction, apical fibrobullous disease with or without secondary pulmonary superinfection, spontaneous pneumothorax, and obstructive sleep apnea. Ankylosing spondylitis is a common cause of pulmonary apical fibrocystic disease; early involvement may be unilateral or asymmetrical, but most cases eventually consist of bilateral apical fibrobullous lesions, many of which are progressive with coalescence of the nodules, formation of cysts and cavities, fibrosis, and bronchiectasis. Mycobacterial or fungal superinfection of the upper lobe cysts and cavities occurs commonly. Aspergillus fumigatus is the most common pathogen isolated, followed by various species of mycobacteria. Prognosis of patients with fibrobullous apical lesions is mainly determined by the presence, extent, and severity of superinfection. Pulmonary function test results are nonspecific and generally parallel the severity of parenchymal involvement. A restrictive ventilatory impairment can develop in patients with ankylosing spondylitis because of either fusion of the costovertebral joints and ankylosis of the thoracic spine or anterior chest wall involvement. Chest radiographic findings may mirror the severity of clinical involvement. Pulmonary parenchymal disease is typically progressive, and cyst formation, cavitation, and fibrosis are seen in advanced cases. No treatment has been shown to alter the clinical course of apical fibrobullous disease. Although several antiinflammatory agents, such as infliximab, etanercept, and adalimumab, are being used to treat ankylosing spondylitis, their effects on pulmonary manifestations are unclear.
  Pulmonary involvement is common in patients with connective tissue diseases (CTDs), and significantly contributes to morbidity and mortality in this patient population. There are different forms of lung pathology in CTDs, which include primary involvement such as interstitial lung disease or pulmonary hemorrhage, and pulmonary complications resulting from other CTD-related organ involvement including aspiration pneumonia due to muscle weakness or esophageal fibrosis. Moreover, iatrogenic lung disease, such as medication-induced hypersensitivity pneumonitis or opportunistic infections due to immunosuppression, may develop. Appropriate treatment of pulmonary complications in patients with CTDs requires careful diagnostic workup because different forms of lung involvement may overlap, causing similar clinical manifestations and similar radiological or functional impairment. Moreover, in view of the broad variability of clinical course of CTD-related interstitial lung disease, identification of biomarkers helpful in predicting prognosis becomes of key importance. In addition to radiological assessment and functional testing that provide information regarding localization and severity of lung disease, bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) appears helpful in revealing the nature of lung pathology and intensity of lung inflammation through sampling of cells and fluid from the lower respiratory tract. The aim of this article is to critically review available data concerning the evaluation of BAL cytology in different forms of lung disease associated with CTDs.
  The H1N1 pandemic flu is a significant risk factor for both patients with chronic disease who need organ transplantation and transplant recipients. This population needs special care regarding comorbidities and related complications. MB, a 38-year-old Italian cystic fibrosis male patient with lung and pancreatic involvement, was referred to our division in July 2009 for fever-associated arthromyalgia, headache, and rhinitis. Lung transplantation had been performed in September 2005, and he was subsequently treated with immunosuppressive therapy: tacrolimus, everolimus, and prednisolone. In the past, chronic respiratory colonization with Pseudomonas aeruginosa and intermittent infection with Aspergillus flavus, chronic renal failure, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus complicated his clinical history. He started antiviral treatment with oseltamivir despite no travel history and no respiratory symptoms. H1N1 swab was positive. Three days later, the patient was admitted to the hospital for the persistence of fever and the onset of cough. Chest x-ray showed a left lower pneumonia, which was confirmed by computerized tomography. Broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy led to an improvement of the clinical condition. The patient was discharged 8 days later; a control swab was negative. This case report suggests some general considerations regarding solid organ recipients: 1) Flu-related complications require early treatment (both antiviral and antibiotic); 2) active microbiologic surveillance is important to prevent lethal infections (ie, invasive aspergillosis); 3) evaluation of immunosuppressant blood levels is necessary for drug-drug interactions. Active prevention is the best option for decreasing morbidity and mortality in the transplanted patient.
  A comparative study, based on histopathologic findings (inflammation, cellularity, and fibrosis) and immunologic parameters (pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines), was carried out in order to evaluate the effects of itraconazole (ITC) treatment and its starting time in a BALB/c murine model of chronic pulmonary paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM), induced by intranasal inoculation of Paracoccidioides brasiliensis (Pb) conidia. Two different groups of mice were exposed to ITC therapy beginning at the 4th or 8th week after Pb infection, respectively. ITC was administered daily, via gavage, for a period of sixty days. At weeks 0, 4, 8, 12 and 16 the animals were sacrificed and their lungs removed for histology staining with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E), Masson's trichromic and Gomori-Grocott; pulmonary levels of IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma, IL-13 and TGF-beta were also measured by ELISA. The development or absence of the principal pulmonary PCM sequela, lung fibrosis, was directly related to the therapy's starting time. This and other histopathological findings were related to the behavior of cytokine levels.
  Of the idiopathic interstitial pneumonias, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP) have provoked the most debate and discussion. Although the two diseases are distinct entities, diagnosis is not always straightforward and requires a multidisciplinary approach, integrating clinical, radiological and histologic information. Although there is currently no effective treatment for either disease, the importance of differentiating NSIP from IPF lies in the management of the individual patient, with particular focus on outcome and pace of change, and enrollment into novel treatment trials of IPF.
  Although core needle biopsy has been shown to be an accurate means of diagnosing lung malignancies, there is relatively little information in the literature about its utility in diagnosing specific non-malignant conditions. We reviewed the pathologic findings in 159 core needle biopsies showing benign changes in order to determine the types of processes that can be diagnosed by this technique and the factors that influence accuracy and specificity. There were 155 patients ranging in age from 3 to 86 years (mean 58). Nodules or masses were present radiologically in most. They ranged from 0.5 to 8.0 cm (mean 1.65 cm) in size and 80% measured 2.0 cm or less. Twenty percent were spiculated, and positron emission tomography scans were positive in 48 of 56 cases tested (30% of total). Specific diagnoses were established in 122 (77%) of 159 core needle biopsies, while 24 (15%) were nonspecific and 13 (8%) were nonrepresentative. The most common specific diagnoses were necrotizing granulomatous inflammation (45), scar (28), organizing pneumonia (13), and benign neoplasms (11). A mixture of interstitial fibrosis and chronic inflammation (16) was the most common nonspecific diagnosis. A specific diagnosis was significantly more likely in biopsies with 3 or more cores or with a core length of more than 1 cm. Malignancy was diagnosed on a subsequent biopsy in only one case, and the initial biopsy in that case showed non-specific chronic inflammation and fibrosis. Our findings confirm that core needle biopsy is an accurate method of diagnosing benign lung lesions, yielding specific diagnoses in the majority.
  Interstitial lung disease has been reported in cancer patients treated with epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors, erlotinib and gefitinib. Preclinical safety studies with erlotinib did not show any evidence for an induction of injury on intact lungs in rats and dogs. In the present study, we investigated the effects of erlotinib on lung injury induced by intratracheal administration of bleomycin (BLM) in rats. In Experiment 1, we examined the effects of short-term (7- and 21-day) administration of erlotinib (10 mg/kg/day, p.o.; subtoxic dose) on the BLM (0.1 or 0.6 mg/rat)-induced lung injury of slight and moderate severity. In Experiment 2, we examined the effects of long term (up to 63-day) administration of higher-dose (up to 20 mg/kg/day; toxic dose; accompanied with decreased body weight gain and severe skin lesions) erlotinib on the BLM-induced lung injury. In rats receiving erlotinib alone, no lung lesions were noted. In rats receiving BLM alone, diffuse alveolar damage (DAD) and, subsequently, pulmonary fibrosis of slight or moderate severity was observed. The administration of erlotinib to BLM-treated rats showed no exacerbation of lung injuries in indices such as macroscopic findings, lung weights, histopathological scores (lung lesion density and lung fibrosis score), and pulmonary hydroxyproline (HyP) level. These results suggest that erlotinib does not have any exacerbating effects on lung injuries induced by BLM in rats.
  We report the pathological findings of the lung after acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), and pulmonary function tests during five years of follow-up. A 39-year-old woman, treated for acute myelogenous leukemia, developed ARDS. She recovered from ARDS but suffered from pulmonary aspergillosis. Her aspergilloma was removed surgically. Her lung function tests and diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DL(CO)) improved but diffusion impairment remained five years after recovery. Pathological examination of the resected material showed sclerosis in lobular septa and scattered fibrosis in alveolar ducts except for the aspergillosis. These fibrotic changes may be causally associated with her loss of DL(CO).
  BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The outcome of acute exacerbation of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (AE-IPF) is usually very poor, and it has been suggested that mechanical ventilation does not benefit AE-IPF patients. Noninvasive ventilation (NIV) has attracted attention as a means to avoid intubation in acute respiratory failure, including acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). This study describes the outcome of patients with AE-IPF who were treated with NIV. METHODS: Patients included in the study were those who fulfilled the criteria for AE-IPF during the periods between April 1998 and June 2004 at Tosei General Hospital, and in whom NIV was introduced. Clinical data were obtained retrospectively from patient records. RESULTS: This study included 11 patients. The initial NIV settings were continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) mode in 6 patients (mean 10.1+/-2.5 cmH(2)O) and Spontaneous/Timed mode in 5 (mean inspiratory positive airway pressure/expiratory positive airway pressure; 15.0+/-3.3/10.2+/-2.9 cmH(2)O). Five patients avoided intubation and survived more than 3 months after AE-IPF. Six patients who failed NIV died within 3 months. In these 6 patients, 4 required intubation. The other 2 patients, who refused endotracheal intubation, died without intubation. Median survival time and 3-month survivals after acute exacerbation were 30 days, and 45.5%, respectively. CONCLUSION: Considering extremely poor prognosis of AE-IPF, our findings suggest that NIV is a viable option for the respiratory management in AE-IPF, and should be studied in a large, well-controlled trial.

