  Herein we report the antiproliferative effects of a series of 28 compounds against the MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell line, including the synthesis of seven new [3]ferrocenophanyl and four new ferrocenyl compounds. For each p-R-phenyl substitution pattern investigated, the [3]ferrocenophanyl derivatives were more cytotoxic than the corresponding ferrocenyl derivative, with the highest activity found for compounds with protic substituents. Theoretical calculations of the HOMO-LUMO gap for the molecules in the Fe(3+) oxidation state suggest a higher reactivity for the [3]ferrocenophanyl derivatives. A lead compound from each series, a [3]ferrocenophanyl and a ferrocenyl compound, possessing two phenol groups, were screened against the NCI/DTP 60-cell-line panel. The mean activity over all cell lines was better than cisplatin for both compounds, and both compounds showed subpanel selectivity for leukemia, CNS cancer, and renal cancer. Low systemic toxicity and lack of interaction with DNA (when in the reduced form), suggest that the compounds may act as prodrugs.
  Much attention is directed currently to identifying sub-types of cancers that are genetically and clinically distinct. The expectation is that sub-typing on the basis of somatic genomic characteristics will supplant traditional pathological sub-types with respect to relevance for targeted therapies and clinical course. Less attention has been paid to the goal of validating sub-types on the basis of the distinctiveness of their etiologies. In this article it is shown that studies of individuals with double primary malignancies provide uniquely valuable information for establishing the etiologic distinctiveness of candidate tumor sub-types. Studies of double primaries have the potential to definitively rank candidate taxonomic systems with respect to their etiological relevance by determining which sub-types are most highly correlated in the double primaries. The concept is illustrated with data from studies of the concordance of estrogen and progestin status in bilateral breast cancers, where it is shown that double primaries are much more likely to be concordant with respect to ER status than for PR status. The high concordance of ER status is consistent with a growing literature demonstrating the etiologic distinctiveness of ER+ and ER- tumors.
  Studies have shown an increased risk of malignancies in women with endometriosis. Little is known about the impact of endometriosis on cancer survival. We investigated whether the survival after a diagnosis of a malignancy differs in women with a previously diagnosed endometriosis compared to other women.Women with a first time diagnosis of a malignancy in 1969 - 2005, were identified using the National Swedish Cancer Register (NSCR). By use of the National Swedish Patient Register (NSPR) we identified all women with a diagnosis of endometriosis during the same period and linked these patients with the data from the NSCR. The cohort comprised 4 278 women with endometriosis and a malignancy, and 41 831 randomly selected matched women without endometriosis. Cox regression was used for all calculations to obtain crude and adjusted cause specific mortality rates, measured as hazard ratios (HR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI).46 109 women entered the study. There was a statistically significant better survival for women with endometriosis for all malignancies combined (HR=0.92) and for breast cancer (HR=0.86) and ovarian cancer (HR=0.81) specifically. For breast cancer the survival enhancing effect in women with endometriosis decreased with increasing parity. There was poorer survival in malignant melanoma for women with endometriosis (HR=1.52).The survival in a malignancy is better in women with a previously diagnosed endometriosis compared to women without endometriosis especially for breast and ovarian cancers. The prognosis of malignant melanoma is poorer in women with endometriosis.
  Attempts to find genes contribution to complex diseases, such as cancer, require new study designs which incorporate an efficient use of population resources and modern genotyping technologies. We describe here two approaches, used by us for the study of breast cancer, both of which take the use of biobanks. One uses a cancer registry as a source of case information, which is then linked to a biobank on blood DNA. The biobank provides also samples from matched controls. After genotyping, clinical data are retrieved from hospital records, and the results can be presented for genotype-specific cancer risks, or similarly for genotype-specific clinical and survival parameters. The second approach uses registered data on cancer in families or among twins. On defined groups of patients, paraffin tissue is collected by contacting the pathology departments of the hospitals where the patients were diagnosed. Tumor and healthy tissue is prepared and used for mutation, the loss of heterozygosity, or copy number analysis. We believe that in the era of whole-genome genotyping technologies, the importance of well-characterized sample sets cannot be overemphasized. Samples rather than technologies limit the rate of gene discovery in complex diseases.
  INTRODUCTION: Although the majority of breast cancer patients are older than 65 years, limited data exist regarding the pathological features in very elderly patients. The aim of this study was to evaluate the histological characteristics of breast cancer in women aged over 80 years. METHODS: The histological data were reviewed for 137 women aged 80 years and older who were diagnosed with primary breast carcinoma at a university clinic during the period 1990-2005. RESULTS: Although it is believed that older women have more advanced tumor, the majority of the tumors were assessed as stage I (35%) and II (32.9%). Mucinous, papillary, medullary, tubular, and cribriform histological subtypes have been demonstrated often in this age group (16.8%). In 49.7 and 70.6% of cases, respectively, there were no regional lymph node metastases and no distant metastases. The frequency of ER-positive (72%) and PR-positive (56%) tumors in these patients is high. CONCLUSIONS: An accurate prognostic evaluation at the time of initial diagnosis is of high importance for older patients, since this could avoid unnecessary and risky therapies. As an increasing number of women ≥80 years old may be diagnosed with breast cancer in the coming years, treatment in this specific age group should be individualized to the patient and tumor factors.
  Vasopressin-activated calcium-mobilizing (VACM-1) protein is a cul-5 gene product that forms complexes with a subclass of ubiquitin E3 ligases involved in proteasomal protein degradation. The expression of VACM-1 cDNA in the T47D breast cancer cell line inhibits growth and decreases phosphorylation of mitogen activated protein kinase. Factors that regulate expression or stability of VACM-1 protein have not been identified, however. In our search to identify drugs/substances that may control VACM-1 protein expression, we examined the effects of resveratrol (trans-3,5,4'-trihydroxystilbene), a natural component in the human diet which inhibits tumor initiation and promotion. CMV vector and VACM-1 cDNA stably transfected T47D breast cancer-derived cells were treated with resveratrol and cell growth and VACM-1 protein concentrations were measured. Since the cellular mechanism of resveratrol-dependent inhibition of cell growth also involves the regulation of estrogen receptors, the effect of 17-β-estradiol and resveratrol on ERα levels and on cell growth was examined in control and in VACM-1 cDNA transfected cells. Our results demonstrate that antiproliferative effect of resveratrol observed in the control T47D cancer cells was significantly enhanced in VACM-1 cDNA transfected T47D cells. Western blot results indicated that resveratrol increased VACM-1 protein concentration. Finally, treatment with resveratrol for 24 and 48 h attenuated 17-β-estradiol induced increase in cell growth both in control and in VACM-1 cDNA transfected cells. The effect was significantly higher in the VACM-1 cDNA transfected cells when compared to controls. These results indicate that the antiproliferative effect of resveratrol may involve induction of VACM-1/cul5.
  Sunitinib malate (SU11248) is a multitarget oral tyrosine kinase receptor (RTKs) inhibitor which was approved by FDA in renal cells carcinoma (RCC) and imatinib-resistant or imatinib-intollerant gastrointestinal stromal tumour (GIST). Sunitinib is able to inhibit RTKs such as receptors for platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF-R alpha and beta) and for vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGFRs). It is able to inhibit KIT receptor, colony stimulating factor type 1 receptor (CSF- 1R), glial cell line neutrophic factor receptor (RET), fms-like tyrosine kinase receptor-3 (FLT-3 or CD135), signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) and AKT (protein kinase B) in tumour cells. Many sunitinib targets play important roles in growth and survival of human breast cancer (BC). The "rationale" of sunitinib in BC (with or without others antiagiogenetic therapy) is its ability to block simultaneously intracellular portion of RTKs inhibiting many downstream signals. We overviewed the most relevant studies concerning sunitinib in metastatic BC. Clin Ter 2010; 161(5):475-482.
  The coordination modes of copper(ii) complexes of Schiff base-derived coumarin ligands, which had previously shown good anti-Candida activity, were investigated by pH-potentiometric and UV-Vis spectroscopic methods. These studies confirmed the coordination mode of the ligands to be through the N of the imine and deprotonated phenol of the coumarin-derived ligand in solution. In addition, the more active complexes and their corresponding ligands were investigated in the presence of copper(ii) in liquid and frozen solution by ESR spectroscopic methods. A series of secondary amine derivatives of the Schiff base ligands, were isolated with good solubility characteristics but showed little anti-Candida activity. However, cytotoxicity studies of the secondary amines, together with the copper complexes and their corresponding ligands, against human colon cancer and human breast cancer cells identified the chemotherapeutic potential of these new ligands.
  BACKGROUND: The transcription factor c-Myb has been well characterized as an oncogene in several human tumor types, and its expression in the hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell population is essential for proper hematopoiesis. However, the role of c-Myb in mammopoeisis and breast tumorigenesis is poorly understood, despite its high expression in the majority of breast cancer cases (60-80%). METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We find that c-Myb high expression in human breast tumors correlates with the luminal/ER+ phenotype and a good prognosis. Stable RNAi knock-down of endogenous c-Myb in the MCF7 luminal breast tumor cell line increased tumorigenesis both in vitro and in vivo, suggesting a possible tumor suppressor role in luminal breast cancer. We created a mammary-derived c-Myb expression signature, comprised of both direct and indirect c-Myb target genes, and found it to be highly correlated with a published mature luminal mammary cell signature and least correlated with a mammary stem/progenitor lineage gene signature. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These data describe, for the first time, a possible tumor suppressor role for the c-Myb proto-oncogene in breast cancer that has implications for the understanding of luminal tumorigenesis and for guiding treatment.
  Within healthy human somatic cells, retrotransposition by long interspersed nuclear element-1 (also known as LINE-1 or L1) is thought to be held in check by a variety of mechanisms, including DNA methylation and RNAi. The expression of L1-ORF1 protein, which is rarely found in normal tissue, was assayed using antibodies with a variety of clinical cancer specimens and cancer cell lines. L1-ORF1p expression was detected in nearly all breast tumors that the authors examined, and the protein was also present in a high percentage of ileal carcinoids, bladder, and pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors, as well as in a smaller percentage of prostate and colorectal tumors. Tumors generally demonstrated cytoplasmic L1-ORF1p; however, in several breast cancers, L1-ORF1p was nuclear. Patients with breast tumors displaying nuclear L1-ORF1p had a greater incidence of both local recurrence and distal metastases and also showed poorer overall survival when compared with patients with tumors displaying cytoplasmic L1-ORF1p. These data suggest that expression of L1-ORF1p is widespread in many cancers and that redistribution from cytoplasm to nucleus could be a poor prognostic indicator during breast cancer. High expression and nuclear localization of L1-ORF1p may result in a higher rate of L1 retrotransposition, which could increase genomic instability.
  Breast metastases from an extramammary primary tumor are very rare and the prognosis for such patients is generally poor. We report here on a case of a 42-year-old female with metastasis of non-small cell lung cancer to the breast, and she is now being followed up on an outpatient basis. In 2004, she presented with a solitary pulmonary nodule in the left lung, and this lesion had been noted to have gradually increased in size over time. The final pathological diagnosis was adenocarcinoma, and the diagnosis was made by performing percutaneous needle aspiration and lobectomy of the left upper lobe. Adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy were given. Unfortunately, a nodule in the left breast was noted three years later, and metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer to the breast was diagnosed by excisional biopsy. Making the correct diagnosis to distinguish a primary breast carcinoma from a metastatic one is important, because the therapeutic plan and outcome for these two types of cancer are quite different.
  PURPOSE: Recent research has identified many genes and proteins that play specific roles in the process of systemic metastasis in various types of cancer. Rho GDP dissociation inhibitor 2 (RhoGDI2) has been shown to inhibit metastasis in human bladder cancer, but its role in breast cancer is controversial. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We examined the regulation and clinical significance of RhoGDI2 in Korean breast cancer patients by using proteomic approaches. RESULTS: By using a proteomic approach, we observed an increased expression of RhoGDI2 in human breast cancer tissues when compared to that of the normal breast tissues, and we validated its up-regulation in an independent cohort of 8 breast cancer patients. The clinical implication of a RhoGDI2 expression was investigated in 57 breast cancer patients by performing immunohistochemistry. RhoGDI2 did not show a significant association with the tumor size, lymph node metastasis, the histologic grade or the hormone receptor status. However, the patients with RhoGDI2-expressing tumors had significantly shorter disease-free survival (p=0.043; hazard ratio, 3.87) and distant metastasis-free survival (p=0.039; hazard ratio, 5.15). CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrated a potential role of RhoGDI2 as a poor prognostic marker as well as a potential therapeutic target. The pro-metastatic nature of RhoGDI2 shown in our study may indicate its organ-specific role in cancer metastasis.
  Diabetes, in particular type 2, is associated with an increased incidence of cancer. Although the mortality attributable to cancer in type 2 diabetes is overshadowed by that due to cardiovascular disease, emerging data from epidemiologic studies suggest that insulin therapy may confer added risk for cancer, perhaps mediated by signaling through the IGF-1 (insulin-like growth factor-1) receptor. Co-administered metformin seems to mitigate the risk associated with insulin. A recent series of publications in Diabetologia addresses the possibility that glargine, the most widely used long-acting insulin analogue, may confer a greater risk than other insulin preparations, particularly for breast cancer. This has led to a heated controversy. Despite this, there is a consensus that the currently available data are not conclusive and should not be the basis for any change in practice. Further studies and more thorough surveillance of cancer in diabetes are needed to address this important issue.
  BRCA and poly-ADP ribose polymerase (PARP) regulate pathways of DNA repair. Due to the accumulation of mutations introduced by error-prone DNA repair, breast and ovarian cancers develop in the setting of BRCA deficiency. A series of recent clinical trials has tested the use of PARP inhibition as a therapeutic strategy to target BRCA-deficient tumors.
  PURPOSE: Estimates of insomnia in breast cancer patients are high, with reports of poor sleep lasting years after completion of cancer treatment. This randomized controlled crossover pilot study looked at the effects of individual cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia (IND-CBT-I) on sleep in breast cancer survivors. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Twenty-one participants were randomly assigned to either a treatment group (six weekly IND-CBT-I sessions followed by six weeks of follow up) or a delayed treatment control group (no treatment for six weeks followed by six weekly IND-CBT-I sessions). Of these, 14 participants completed the pilot study (six in the treatment group and eight in the delayed treatment control group). RESULTS: Self-rated insomnia was significantly improved in the treatment group compared to the waiting period in the delayed treatment control group. The pooled pre-post-IND-CBT-I analyses revealed improvements in self-rated insomnia, sleep quality, and objective measures of sleep. CONCLUSIONS: These preliminary results suggest that IND-CBT-I is appropriate for improving sleep in breast cancer survivors. Individual therapy in a clinic or private practice may be a more practical option for this population as it is more easily accessed and readily available in an outpatient setting.
  Boningmycin, a new antibiotic of the bleomycin family, is isolated from the fermentation broth of Streptomyces verticillus var. pingyangensis n.sp. This study aimed to evaluate its antitumor actions and mechanism. The results showed that boningmycin exhibited potent inhibitory effects on several human solid tumor cells and that it was stronger than bleomycin. The administration of boningmycin inhibited the growth of human hepatoma HepG2 xenografts in nude mice, with more efficacy than that of bleomycin. Boningmycin led to an increase of the reactive oxygen species involving iron and caused G2/M phase accumulation in the HepG2 and human breast cancer MCF-7 cells. Two types of cell death, apoptosis and senescence, were detected after exposure to boningmycin. The accumulation of sub-G1 phase cells, an index of apoptosis, and the activation of caspase apoptotic pathways were detected after treatment with higher concentrations of boningmycin. Low concentrations of boningmycin led to a senescent phenotype with an increase in senescence-associated β-galactosidase activity and the time-dependent increase of p21, p27, and p53 expressions from 48 to120 h. Taken together, the results showed that boningmycin exhibits potent antitumor actions through the induction of apoptosis and cellular senescence.
  Cancer stem cells (CSCs)/tumor-initiating cells have been defined as a subset of tumor cells responsible for initiating and sustaining tumor development. Emerging evidence strongly supports the existence of CSCs in various solid tumors, but they have not yet been identified in human gallbladder carcinomas (GBC). In this study, we identified CSCs in primary GBC and in the cell line GBC-SD using the cell surface markers CD44 and CD133. The percentages of CD44(+)CD133(+) cells were 1.76-3.05% in primary tumors and 40.29% in GBC-SD cells. These cells showed stem cell properties, including selfrenewal, differentiation potential and high tumorigenicity. In vitro culture experiments revealed that CD44(+)CD133(+) GBC cells possessed a higher spheroid-colony forming ability in serum-free media than other subpopulations. When injected into nonobese diabetic/severe combined immunodeficient mice, these cells formed new tumors and generated CD44(+)CD133(+), CD44(-) and CD133(-) progeny. CD44(+)CD133(+) cells also showed a high degree of chemoresistance, possibly due to upregulation of the breast cancer resistance protein (ABCG2) and the transcription factor Gli1 in these highly tumorigenic cells. These results suggest that the CD44(+)CD133(+) population exhibited CSC-like characteristics and may thus provide a novel approach to the diagnosis and treatment of GBC.
  In breast cancer, inactivation of the RB tumor suppressor gene is believed to occur via multiple mechanisms to facilitate tumorigenesis. However, the prognostic and predictive value of RB status in disease-specific clinical outcomes has remained uncertain. We investigated RB pathway deregulation in the context of both ER-positive and ER-negative disease using combined microarray datasets encompassing over 900 breast cancer patient samples. Disease-specific characteristics of RB pathway deregulation were investigated in this dataset by evaluating correlation among pathway genes as well as differential expression across patient tumor populations defined by ER status. Survival analysis among these breast cancer samples demonstrates that the RB-loss signature is associated with poor disease outcome within several independent cohorts. Within the ER-negative subpopulation, the RB-loss signature is associated with improved response to chemotherapy and longer relapse-free survival. Additionally, while individual genes in the RB target signature closely reproduce its prognostic value, they also serve to predict and monitor response to therapeutic compounds, such as the cytostatic agent PD-0332991. These results indicate that the RB-loss signature expression is associated with poor outcome in breast cancer, but predicts improved response to chemotherapy based on data in ER-negative populations. While the RB-loss signature, as a whole, demonstrates prognostic and predictive utility, a small subset of markers could be sufficient to stratify patients based on RB function and inform the selection of appropriate therapeutic regimens.
  Purpose: To evaluate the feasibility of adjuvant docetaxel plus cyclophosphamide(TC)therapy for breast cancer. Patients and methods: A total of 16 patients with intermediate risk-breast cancer were enrolled. TC therapy consisted of four courses of docetaxel 75mg/m² plus cyclophosphamide 600 mg/m² intravenous administration over three weeks. Every infusion was premedicated with intravenous administration of granisetron 3 mg plus dexamethasone 16 mg, followed by dexamethasone 8 mg p. o. on days 2 and 3. Results: Due to the allergic reaction, one patient discontinued TC therapy. Fifteen(94%)of the 16 patients completed the scheduled TC therapy. Feasibility was 93. 7%. Grade 3/4 toxicity was limited to leucopenia, neutropenia, and febrile neutropenia. No non-hematological serious adverse events were observed. Conclusion: Adjuvant TC therapy is a feasible option for breast cancer.
  It has been thought that there is a possibility that infusion speed generally affects the manifested frequency of infusion reaction and its strength. The infusion prescription time of trastuzumab should be over 90 minutes according to the package insert. In the infusion US, is possible over 30 minutes after the second time. We sought to evaluate the safety and tolerability of trastuzumab administered as a 30-minute infusion. Patients: Eighteen patients of HER2-positive breast cancer were treated, and their age ranged from 37 to 65 years old(median, 54 years old). Method: Patients were infused with 8mg/kg of trastuzumab over 90 minutes and, if tolerated, all subsequent maintenance doses of 6mg/kg are over 30 minutes. Result: The infusion times for 30 minutes were twice to 17 times(16 times the median). Mild infusion reactions were seen in 2 cases at the time of the initial prescription, but the infusion reaction was not judged from the prescription for 30 minutes. Mild eczema was admitted by 3 cases after prescription. No decline in cardiac function was seen. Conclusion: Our data strongly suggest that trastuzumab can be safely infused over 30 minutes for 6mg/kg maintenance doses. However, it is thought that the number of cases will increase in future, and confirmation is necessary.
  Palliative therapy using radioactive strontium(89Sr)was performed on 60 patients suffering from cancer. Seventy-one percent of the patients had stopped or reduced their opiates and/or analgesics. Pain relief continued for up to three months. Patients with breast and prostatic cancer showed the best pain reduction. However, pain reduction was limited for lung cancer patients. Repeated usage of / 89Sr with/without opiate and analgesics served to maintain the reduced level of pain. Side effects of repeated usage of 89Sr were decrease of hemoglobin, WBC, and platelets. The decreased level was limited within Level 1. The indication of 89Sr therapy is important. DIC cases and renal failure cases will have increased side effect risk. Image diagnosis is also important. A bone scan is a minimum requirement. Poor accumulation of 99mTc-MDP cases are not indication. Rapidly progressive disease cases, radiculopathy cases, and soft tissue invasion cases should not be given 89Sr therapy. At present, the uses of 89Sr are limited to end-stage patients. The use of 89Sr should change from end stage to early stage in combination with chemotherapy.
  African-American (AA) women are more likely to have late stage, aggressive, rapidly growing, and less hormone-responsive breast tumors. An aggressive subtype of cancer, known as "Triple-Negative" (TN), that is negative for Her-2 and for estrogen and progesterone receptors (ER and PR), is reported to be more common in AA women. We examined the clinical, histopathologic, and prognostic features of TN tumors in AA and Caucasian women. Tumor size, grade, histologic type, lymphovascular invasion (LVI), lymph node status, patient survival, ploidy status, and expression of ER, PR, p53, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), MIB-1, Bcl-2, Her-2, p27, and p21 were evaluated. The TN tumors (75%) were high grade, large, aneuploid tumors that occurred in younger women and were more likely to have a high rate of LVI, elevated MIB-1 score, and nodal metastases. Patients with TN tumors showed poorer overall survival. There was no difference in overall or disease-free survival (p = 0.46) in the AA versus Caucasian women. LVI was a significant predictor of overall survival in AA but not in Caucasian women. There were minor differences in histopathologic features, biomarker expressions, and survival in AA and Caucasian women with TN tumors. The absence of LVI in AA patients predicted an excellent probability of survival.
  The aim of this study was to examine the role of cognitive appraisal in predicting psychosocial adjustment during the postradiation treatment transition. A predictive correlational design was used in a convenience sample of 80 patients with breast, lung, and prostate cancer who were receiving radiation therapy. Two weeks prior to completion of treatment, participants completed instruments to measure symptom distress, uncertainty, cognitive appraisal, social support, and self-efficacy for coping. The Psychosocial Adjustment to Illness Scale was administered 1 month after therapy. Adjustment was significantly correlated with all independent variables, age, and comorbidity. Young age and high amounts of threat appraisal, harm/loss appraisal, uncertainty, and symptom distress were significantly associated with poor adjustment. The model predicted 52% of the variability in adjustment. Cognitive appraisal was not a significant explanatory variable for adjustment when controlling for uncertainty, cancer stage, age, and symptom distress. Symptom distress was the only significant predictor of adjustment.
  BACKGROUND: There is an increasing need for the identification of both DNA and RNA biomarkers from pathodiagnostic formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue samples for the exploration of individualized therapy strategies in cancer. We investigated a fully automated, xylene-free nucleic acid extraction method for the simultaneous analysis of RNA and DNA biomarkers related to breast cancer. METHODS: We copurified both RNA and DNA from a single 10-μm section of 210 paired samples of FFPE tumor and adjacent normal tissues (1-25 years of archival time) using a fully automated extraction method. Half of the eluate was DNase I digested for mRNA expression analysis performed by using reverse-transcription quantitative PCR for the genes estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), progesterone receptor (PGR), v-erb-b2 erythroblastic leukemia viral oncogene homolog 2, neuro/glioblastoma derived oncogene homolog (avian) (ERBB2), epoxide hydrolase 1 (EPHX1), baculoviral IAP repeat-containing 5 (BIRC5), matrix metallopeptidase 7 (MMP7), vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA), and topoisomerase (DNA) II alpha 170kDa (TOP2A). The remaining undigested aliquot was used for the analysis of 7 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. RESULTS: In 208 of 210 samples (99.0%) the protocol yielded robust quantification-cycle values for both RNA and DNA normalization. Expression of the 8 breast cancer genes was detected in 81%-100% of tumor tissues and 21%-100% of normal tissues. The 7 SNPs were successfully genotyped in 91%-97% of tumor and 94%-97% of normal tissues. Allele concordance between tumor and normal tissue was 98.9%-99.5%. CONCLUSIONS: This fully automated process allowed an efficient simultaneous extraction of both RNA and DNA from a single FFPE section and subsequent dual analysis of selected genes. High gene expression and genotyping detection rates demonstrate the feasibility of molecular profiling from limited archival patient samples.
  We analyzed whether polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) interfere with the activity of 17 β-estradiol in the proliferation and apoptosis of the MCF-7 cell line. MCF-7 cells were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) without phenol red supplemented with 5% charcoal-treated fetal bovine serum (CD-FBS) for 3 days with 10 nM 17 β-estradiol or 0.1 µM, 0.5 μM and 1 µM of the tested PCB congeners (118, 138, 153 and 180), or both. Cell proliferation was determined by measuring 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation, and cell apoptosis was measured by caspase-9 activity. From the PCB congeners tested, PCB138 and 153 had the highest stimulatory effects on basal cell proliferation as well as the highest inhibitory actions on basal caspase-9 activity. The proliferative and anti-apoptotic actions of PCB138 and 153 were still observed in the presence of 17 β-estradiol, while the actions of PCB118 and 180 were reversed. In conclusion, the results of this study suggest the possibility that PCB138 and 153 contribute to the action of endogenous 17 β-estradiol on cell proliferation and apoptosis in the breast cancer cell line MCF-7.
  OBJECTIVE: The primary objective of this study was to verify whether breast cancer patients aged <35 at diagnosis have poorer prognoses than those aged 35-39, in other words, to identify the prognostic value of age in younger premenopausal patients under 40 years old. The secondary objective was to assess prognostic factors specific for younger premenopausal patients. METHODS: We identified 242 consecutive patients who were diagnosed with stage I-III breast cancer before the age of 40 and underwent surgery between 1990 and 2004. We compared disease-free survival and overall survival in patients aged <35 years and those aged 35-39 years, and evaluated clinicopathological factors associated with disease-free survival or overall survival in each age group and in all patients under the age of 40. RESULTS: Ninety-nine (41%) patients were younger than 35 years and 143 (59%) were between 35 and 39 years. No significant difference in disease-free survival or overall survival was found between the two groups. In our cohort of patients under the age of 40, the independent factors associated with poor disease-free survival and overall survival included positive axillary lymph nodes and triple-negative status, but not age at diagnosis. Adverse prognostic factors also did not differ considerably between the two age groups. CONCLUSIONS: Age at diagnosis was not an independent prognostic factor in our study. Our findings suggest that other clinicopathological features rather than age should be used to determine individualized treatment courses for breast cancer patients younger than 40 years.
  Human breast cancer cells (MCF-7, T-47-D, ZR-75-1) can adapt to circumvent any reduced growth rate during long-term oestrogen deprivation, and this provides three model systems to investigate mechanisms of endocrine resistance in breast cancer. In this paper we report consistent differences in the effects of three growth inhibitors following long term oestrogen deprivation in all three cell models. Long-term oestrogen deprivation of MCF-7, T-47-D and ZR-75-1 cells resulted in reduced growth inhibition by PD98059 (2-10 μg/ml), implying a loss of dependence on MAPK pathways for growth. The growth inhibitor LY294002 (2-10μM) inhibited growth of both oestrogen-maintained and oestrogen-deprived cells with similar dose-responses, implying continued similar dependence on PI3K pathways with no alteration after adaptation to oestrogen independent growth. However, by contrast, long-term oestrogen deprivation resulted in an increased sensitivity to growth inhibition by rapamycin which was not reduced by readdition of oestradiol. The enhanced inhibition of long-term oestrogen-deprived MCF-7-ED, T-47-D-ED and ZR-75-1-ED cell growth by combining rapamycin with LY294002 at concentrations where each alone had little effect offers preclinical support to the development of therapeutic combinations of rapamycin analogues with other PI3K inhibitors in endocrine resistant breast cancer.
  Metformin, an insulin-lowering agent, has been associated with decreased cancer risk in epidemiologic studies in diabetic patients. We performed a comprehensive literature search and meta-analysis of epidemiologic studies to assess the effect of metformin on cancer incidence and mortality in diabetic patients, using Pubmed, ISI Web of Science, Embase, and the Cochrane library until May 2009, with no language or time restrictions. Independent reports with sufficient information to allow risk estimation of cancer risk/mortality and a measure of uncertainty were reviewed and cross-checked independently by three investigators. Eleven studies were selected for relevance in terms of intervention, population studied, independence, and reporting of cancer incidence or mortality data, reporting 4,042 cancer events and 529 cancer deaths. A 31% reduction in overall summary relative risk (0.69; 95% confidence interval, 0.61-0.79) was found in subjects taking metformin compared with other antidiabetic drugs. The inverse association was significant for pancreatic and hepatocellular cancer, and nonsignificant for colon, breast, and prostate cancer. A trend to a dose-response relationship was noted. Metformin is associated with a decreased risk of cancer incidence compared with other treatments among diabetic patients. Given the retrospective nature of most studies and the possibility that the control treatments increase risk, phase II trials are needed before large cancer prevention trials are launched. Cancer Prev Res; 3(11); OF1-11. ©2010 AACR.
  Objectives Our aim was to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of docetaxel versus weekly paclitaxel regimen in patients with metastatic breast cancer previously treated with anthracycline from the Spanish National Health Service (NHS) perspective. Methods A Markov model with a 21-day cycle duration was developed to estimate total treatment-related costs and clinical benefi ts over 5 years of docetaxel (100 mg/m(2)) and weekly paclitaxel (80 mg/m(2)). Patient data were obtained from the Randomized Phase III Study of Docetaxel Compared with Paclitaxel in Metastatic Breast Cancer (TAX- 311) and Anglo-Celtic IV trials. Utilities were obtained from literature, and unitary costs (€2009) from a Spanish health-cost database and the Catalogue of Medicines. Cost and benefits [life-years gained (LYG) and quality-adjusted life years (QALY)] were discounted at 3%. Sensitivity analyses were performed. Results Docetaxel yields higher health benefits (1.83 LYG; 1.08 QALY) than paclitaxel (1.46 LYG; 0.84 QALY). Global costs (treatment, concomitant medication, adverse events management, progression, best supportive care, and end of life phase) per patient were €20,052 and €9,982 with docetaxel and paclitaxel, respectively. Incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) of docetaxel versus paclitaxel was €190/LYG and €295/QALY. Based on a €30,000/QALY threshold, docetaxel has 99% probability of being cost-effective. ICER was mostly sensitive to hazard ratio (HR) (when varied from 1.46 to 1.09; €3,517/ QALY), discount over the ex-lab price of Taxol® (75%; €6,396/QALY) and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) prophylactic treatment (when administered in 60% of cycles instead of 100%; cost saving). Variations in other inputs, such as time horizon (3-10 years), discount rate (0-5%), or adverse event cost (± 25%) were shown not to have relevant influence on the results. Conclusion Compared to weekly paclitaxel, docetaxel therapy is cost effective for treating metastatic breast cancer patients.
  Introduction: The risk of colorectal cancer (CRC) after BC and the additional risk factor of tamoxifen exposure were investigated by several studies with conflicting results. We performed a case-control study aimed at investigating if a past history of breast cancer is a risk factor of developing adenomas or CRC and establishing whether tamoxifen exposure is an additional risk factor. Materials and methods: We enrolled 175 asymptomatic women with a past history of BC and invited them to undergo a screening colonoscopy. In the same period, we enrolled 201 healthy asymptomatic women (HG) with no family history of CRC which were referred to our Unit for a colonoscopy. Results: Mean age at colonoscopy was 56.9 years for BC patients vs. 56.3 years for HG (p=0.58). In 32/175 (18.3%) BC patients, 38 lesions and in 17/201 (8.4%) controls, 20 lesions (p=0.029) were diagnosed. BC patients had 5/32 CRC vs. no CRC in the HG. Multivariate analysis of age, family history of CRC, timing from BC diagnosis and first colonoscopy, tamoxifen treatment revealed that none of the variables were predictive of the presence or absence of adenomas or CRC in the BC group. Discussion: In the present study BC group had a significant higher prevalence of adenoma or CRC than controls. Tamoxifen exposure did not increase the risk of adenoma or CRC. Our data support the hypothesis that BC is a risk condition for adenomas or CRC. The risk is small but present and a screening colonoscopy should be offered to these patients.
  Background: Although national-level organized cancer screening programs have reduced barriers to screening for people of low socioeconomic status, barriers to early screening remain. Our aim was to determine the diffusion pattern and identify the factors associated with early participation in stomach and breast cancer screening programs. Methods: The study population was derived from the Korean National Cancer Screening Survey, conducted in 2007. A stratified random sample of people aged 40 years and older from a nationwide population-based database was gathered in Korea (n=1,517) in 2007. Time of participation in early screening was defined as the number of years that had elapsed between the participant's 30th birthday and the age at first screening. Results: Significant differences were observed in the probability of adopting stomach and breast cancer screening in relation to education, household income, and job level. Results from Cox's proportional hazard model indicated that higher household income was significantly associated with an increased probability of adopting stomach cancer screening earlier (p<0.05), and people with high household incomes were more likely to adopt breast cancer screening earlier than were those with incomes under US$1,500 per month (p<0.01). When considered at a significance level of 0.1, we found that the most highly educated women were more likely than the least educated to be screened early. Conclusions: Despite organized governmental screening programs, there are still inequalities in the early adoption of cancer screening. The results of this study also suggest that inequalities in early adoption may affect participation in regular screening.
  High testosterone levels have been associated with breast cancer. BRCA1 may function as an androgen receptor (AR) co-regulator. We aimed to examine AR haplotype-tagging single-nucleotide polymorphisms (AR htSNPs) and diplotypes in relation to in vivo androgen levels, combined OC use, CAG and GGC genotypes, and BRCA1/2/X family status in 269 young healthy women from breast cancer high-risk families and 56 additional BRCA1/2 mutation carriers. Testosterone, androstenedione, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, and body constitution were measured on cycle days 18-23. Six AR htSNPs and CAG and GGC repeat lengths were genotyped. Most OC users had lower androgen levels than non-users (all Ps<0.0001). Rare variant diplotypes were associated with higher testosterone levels in OC users than in non-users (P(interaction)=0.011). The interaction remained after adjustment for family clustering. Neither individual AR htSNPs nor other diplotypes were significantly associated with androgen levels and did not tag for CAG or GGC genotypes. In the first included woman from each family, the odds of having the most common diplotype was lower in BRCA1 families compared to other families OR 0.41 (95% CI 0.22-0.78). In conclusion, we found few associations between AR htSNPs or diplotypes and androgen levels in women. Diplotypes cannot replace genotyping of microsatellites CAG or GGC. Since testosterone levels are not affected the same way by combined OC use among all women, young women who have higher testosterone levels during combined OC use may belong to the subgroup of women who will not be helped by combined OCs for treatment of androgen-dependent conditions and may be at higher risk for early-onset breast cancer. Whether these women can be identified with AR genotyping needs to be confirmed in an independent cohort.
  There have been several publications of large scale studies with long-term follow up addressing the role of physical activity in the management of breast cancer. Of the twelve studies specifically addressing the effect of physical activity on breast cancer survival, eight showed a statistically significant 50% risk reduction in breast cancer mortality in women who engaged in moderate intensity physical activity before and after their diagnosis of breast cancer. Four smaller studies demonstrated no benefit. Almost all of these observational studies predominantly involved white, professional women from North America and Europe. The positive effects of physical activity were seen for all stages of cancer, with the greatest benefit in steroid receptor positive breast tumours. These studies relied on self-reported questionnaires for recording the levels of physical activity. Despite including thousands of patients, published studies offer no data related to the optimum type, duration and timing of physical activity. Only a few studies provided objective data on physical activity, cardio-respiratory and general fitness. Thus, potential role of physical activity in the management of breast cancer remains far from established. If the beneficial effect of physical activity as demonstrated in the observational studies can be replicated in robust, well designed and well-executed prospective randomised controlled trials, this would provide a tremendous opportunity to enhance adjuvant treatment of breast cancer. By adding physical activity to the spectrum of adjuvant therapies offered to women survival from breast cancer may be enhanced.
  Epidermal growth factor (EGF) and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) signal through EGF and PDGF receptors, which are important receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). Growth hormone (GH) and prolactin (PRL) are four helical bundle peptide hormones that signal via GHR and PRLR, members of the cytokine receptor superfamily. In this study, we examine crosstalk between signaling pathways emanating from these disparate receptor groups (RTKs and cytokine receptors). We find that GH and EGF specifically synergize for activation of ERK in murine preadipocytes. The locus of this synergy resides at the level of MEK activation, but not above this level (ie., not at the level of EGFR, SHC, or Raf activation). Furthermore, dephosphorylation of the scaffold protein, KSR, at a critical serine residue is also synergistically promoted by GH and EGF, suggesting that GH sensitizes these cells to EGF-induced ERK activation by augmenting the actions of KSR in facilitating MEK-ERK activation. Similarly specific synergy in ERK activation is also detected in human T47D breast cancer cells by cotreatment with PRL and PDGF. This synergy also resides at the level of MEK activation. Consistent with this synergy, PRL and PDGF also synergized for c-fos-dependent transactivation of a luciferase reporter gene in T47D cells, indicating that events downstream of ERK activation reflect this signaling synergy. Important conceptual and physiological implications of these findings are discussed.
  PRIMA-1 has been identified as a compound that restores the transactivation function to mutant p53 and induces apoptosis in cells expressing mutant p53. Studies on subcellular distribution of the mutant p53 protein upon treatment with PRIMA-1(Met), a methylated form of PRIMA-1, have suggested that redistribution of mutant p53 to nucleoli may play a role in PRIMA-1 induced apoptosis. Here, we specifically investigated the influence of PRIMA-1 on cellular localization of mutated p53-R280K endogenously expressed in tumour cells. By using immunofluorescence staining, we found a strong nucleolar redistribution of mutant p53 following PRIMA-1 treatment. This subcellular localization was associated to p53 degradation via ubiquitylation. When cells were treated with adriamycin, neither nucleolar redistribution nor mutant p53 down modulation and degradation were observed. Interestingly, cells where p53-R280K was silenced were more sensitive to PRIMA-1 than the parental ones. These results indicate that in some cellular context, the cell sensitivity to PRIMA-1 could depend on the abolition of a gain-of-function activity of the mutated p53, through a protein degradation pathway specifically induced by this compound.
  BACKGROUND: Whether a systemic adjuvant treatment is needed is an area of controversy in patients with node-negative early breast cancer with tumor size of [less than or equal to]1 cm, including T1mic. METHODS: We performed a retrospective analysis of clinical and pathology data of all consecutive patients with node-negative T1mic, T1a, and T1b invasive ductal carcinoma who received surgery between Jan 2000 and Dec 2006. The recurrence free survival (RFS) and risk factors for recurrence were identified. RESULTS: Out of 3889 patients diagnosed with breast cancer, 375 patients were enrolled (T1mic:120, T1a:93, T1b:162). Median age at diagnosis was 49. After a median follow up of 60.8 months, 12 patients developed recurrences (T1mic:4 (3.3%), T1a:2 (2.2%), T1b:6 (3.7%)), with a five-year cumulative RFS rate of 97.2%. Systemic recurrence was identified in three patients. Age younger than 35 years (HR 4.91; 95% CI 1.014-23.763, p=0.048) and triple negative disease (HR 4.93; 95% CI 1.312-18.519, p=0.018) were significantly associated with a higher rate of recurrence. HER2 overexpression, Ki-67, and p53 status did not affect RFS. CONCLUSIONS: Prognosis of node-negative breast cancer with T1mic, T1a and T1b is excellent, but patients under 35 years of age or with triple negative disease have a relatively high risk of recurrence.
  BACKGROUND: The status of estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha) is critical to the clinical prognosis and therapeutic approach in breast cancer. ERalpha-negative breast cancer is clinically aggressive and has a poor prognosis because of the lack of hormone target-directed therapies. Previous studies have shown that epigenetic regulation plays a major role in ERalpha silencing in human breast cancer cells. Dietary green tea polyphenol, ()-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), is believed to be an anticancer agent in part through its regulation of epigenetic processes. RESULTS: In our current studies, we found that EGCG can reactivate ERalpha expression in ERalpha-negative MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. Combination studies using EGCG with the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA), revealed a synergistic effect of reactivation of ERalpha expression in ERalpha-negative breast cancer cells. Reactivation of ERalpha expression by EGCG and TSA treatment was found to sensitize ERalpha-dependent cellular responses to activator 17beta-estradiol (E2) and antagonist tamoxifen in ERalpha-negative breast cancer cells. We also found that EGCG can lead to remodeling of the chromatin structure of the ERalpha promoter by altering histone acetylation and methylation status thereby resulting in ERalpha reactivation. A decreased binding of the transcription repressor complex, Rb/p130-E2F4/5-HDAC1-SUV39H1-DNMT1, in the regulatory region of the ERalpha promoter also contributes to ERalpha transcriptional activation through treatment with EGCG and/or TSA. CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, these studies show that green tea EGCG can restore ERalpha expression by regulating epigenetic mechanisms, and this effect is enhanced when combined with an HDAC inhibitor. This study will facilitate more effective uses of combination approaches in breast cancer therapy and will help to explore more effective chemotherapeutic strategies toward hormone-resistant breast cancer.
  INTRODUCTION: Various multigene predictors of breast cancer clinical outcome have been commercialized, but proved to be prognostic only for hormone receptor (HR) subsets overexpressing estrogen or progesterone receptors. Hormone receptor negative (HRneg) breast cancers, particularly those lacking HER2/ErbB2 overexpression and known as triple-negative (Tneg) cases, are heterogeneous and generally aggressive breast cancer subsets in need of prognostic subclassification, since most early stage HRneg and Tneg breast cancer patients are cured with conservative treatment yet invariably receive aggressive adjuvant chemotherapy. METHODS: An unbiased search for genes predictive of distant metastatic relapse was undertaken using a training cohort of 199 node-negative, adjuvant treatment naive HRneg (including 154 Tneg) breast cancer cases curated from three public microarray datasets. Prognostic gene candidates were subsequently validated using a different cohort of 75 node-negative, adjuvant naive HRneg cases curated from three additional datasets. The HRneg/Tneg gene signature was prognostically compared with eight other previously reported gene signatures, and evaluated for cancer network associations by two commercial pathway analysis programs. RESULTS: A novel set of 14 prognostic gene candidates were identified as outcome predictors: CXCL13, CLIC5, RGS4, RPS28, RFX7, EXOC7, HAPLN1, ZNF3, SSX3, HRBL, PRRG3, ABO, PRTN3, MATN1. A composite HRneg/Tneg gene signature index proved more accurate than any individual candidate gene or other reported multigene predictors in identifying cases likely to remain free of metastatic relapse. Significant positive correlations between the HRneg/Tneg index and three independent immune-related signatures (STAT1, IFN, and IR) were observed, as were consistent negative associations between the three immune-related signatures and five other proliferation module-containing signatures (MS-14, ONCO-RS, GGI, CSR/wound and NKI-70). Network analysis identified 8 genes within the HRneg/Tneg signature as being functionally linked to immune/inflammatory chemokine regulation. CONCLUSIONS: A multigene HRneg/Tneg signature linked to immune/inflammatory cytokine regulation was identified from pooled expression microarray data and shown to be superior to other reported gene signatures in predicting the metastatic outcome of early stage and conservatively managed HRneg and Tneg breast cancer. Further validation of this prognostic signature may lead to new therapeutic insights and spare many newly diagnosed breast cancer patients the need for aggressive adjuvant chemotherapy.
  INTRODUCTION: 17-allyamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17-AAG), a small molecule inhibitor of Hsp90, is currently in clinical trials in breast cancer. However, 17-AAG treatment often results in inhibition of tumor growth rather than shrinkage, making detection of response a challenge. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) and spectroscopic imaging (MRSI) are noninvasive imaging methods than can be used to monitor metabolic biomarkers of drug-target modulation. This study set out to examine the MRS-detectable metabolic consequences of Hsp90 inhibition in a breast cancer model. METHODS: MCF-7 breast cancer cells were investigated, and MRS studies were performed both on live cells and on cell extracts. 31P and 1H MRS were used to determine total cellular metabolite concentrations and 13C MRS was used to probe the metabolism of [1,2-13C]-choline. To explain the MRS metabolic findings, microarray and RT-PCR were used to analyze gene expression, and in vitro activity assays were performed to determine changes in enzymatic activity following 17-AAG treatment. RESULTS: Treatment of MCF-7 cells with 17-AAG for 48 hours caused a significant increase in intracellular levels of choline (to 266 +/- 18% of control, P = 0.05) and phosphocholine (PC; to 181 +/- 10% of control, P = 0.001) associated with an increase in expression of choline transporter SLC44A1 and an elevation in the de novo synthesis of PC. We also detected an increase in intracellular levels of glycerophosphocholine (GPC; to 176 +/- 38% of control, P = 0.03) associated with an increase in PLA2 expression and activity. CONCLUSIONS: This study determined that in the MCF-7 breast cancer model inhibition of Hsp90 by 17-AAG results in a significant MRS-detectable increase in choline, PC and GPC, which is likely due to an increase in choline transport into the cell and phospholipase activation. 1H MRSI can be used in the clinical setting to detect levels of total choline-containing metabolite (t-Cho, composed of intracellular choline, PC and GPC). As Hsp90 inhibitors enter routine clinical use, t-Cho could thus provide an easily detectable, noninvasive metabolic biomarker of Hsp90 inhibition in breast cancer patients.
  BACKGROUND: Polyamine metabolism has a critical role in cell death and proliferation representing a potential target for intervention in breast cancer (BC). This study investigates the expression of spermine oxidase (SMO) and its prognostic significance in BC. Biochemical analysis of Spm analogues BENSpm and CPENSpm, utilized in anticancer therapy, was also carried out to test their property in silico and in vitro on the recombinant SMO enzyme. METHODS: BC tissue samples were analyzed for SMO transcript level and SMO activity. Student's t test was applied to evaluate the significance of the differences in value observed in T and NT samples. The structure modeling analysis of BENSpm and CPENSpm complexes formed with the SMO enzyme and their inhibitory activity, assayed by in vitro experiments, were examined. RESULTS: Both the expression level of SMO mRNA and SMO enzyme activity were significantly lower in BC samples compared to NT samples. The modeling of BENSpm and CPENSpm complexes formed with SMO and their inhibition properties showed that both were good inhibitors. CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that underexpression of SMO is a negative marker in BC. The SMO induction is a remarkable chemotherapeutical target. The BENSpm and CPENSpm are efficient SMO inhibitors. The inhibition properties shown by these analogues could explain their poor positive outcomes in Phases I and II of clinical trials.
  Bone metastases result in considerable morbidity and exert complex demands on health care resources. Additionally, for many patients, metastatic bone disease is a chronic condition affecting quality of life and independence over years rather than months. The bisphosphonates, notably zoledronic acid, have been shown to reduce skeletal morbidity in multiple myeloma, as well as a wide range of solid tumors affecting bone, by 30-50%. Quite appropriately, the bisphosphonates are increasingly used alongside anticancer treatments to prevent skeletal complications and relieve bone pain. In addition, they are increasingly used to prevent cancer treatment-induced bone loss and show promise in the adjuvant setting to prevent metastasis from breast cancer.
  Osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ), previously an entity associated with radiation therapy to the head and neck, has been observed in patients treated with bisphosphonates. Patients with metastatic breast cancer and myelomatous bone disease, commonly treated with high-potency nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates for a prolonged period of time, have the greatest risk of ONJ development. The reported frequency of ONJ ranges from 0.6% to 6.2% in breast cancer and from 1.7% to 15% in patients with multiple myeloma. Osteonecrosis of the jaw has also been observed in patients with other cancers such as prostate cancer and in benign bone disorders such as osteoporosis and Paget's disease in which the incidence is low. Risk factors associated with the development of ONJ include dental extractions, length of bisphosphonate treatment, and the type of bisphosphonate used. In this review, we summarize the reported incidence and risk factors associated with ONJ.
  Mendelian genetics forms the basis for gene-informed risk assessment and management for the patient and family, and should be at the very foundation of 21st century personalization of healthcare. Yet this is an underutilized commodity. Identification and characterization of germline mutations in the RET proto-oncogene, encoding a receptor tyrosine kinase, as causing >90% of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2), an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by medullary thyroid cancer, pheochromocytoma, and hyperparathyroidism, heralded the era of evidence-based molecular diagnosis, predictive testing, genetic counseling, gene-informed cancer risk assessment, and preventative medicine. Since then, many syndromic endocrine neoplasias have proven to fall under this clinically utile and actionable model, such as those caused by mutations in RET, VHL, or SDHB-D. The familial risk associated with epithelial (nonmedullary) thyroid carcinoma is among the highest of all solid tumors, yet only a few highly penetrant heritable epithelial thyroid cancer syndrome exist. This is illustrated by Cowden syndrome, a difficult-to-recognize autosomal dominant disorder characterized by breast, thyroid, and other cancers, caused by germline mutations in PTEN, encoding a phosphatase, and minorly, SDHB/SDHD variants.
  guvenc g., akyuz a. & açikel c.h. (2010) Health Belief Model Scale for Cervical Cancer and Pap Smear Test: psychometric testing. Journal of Advanced Nursing Aim.  This study is a report of the development and psychometric testing of the Health Belief Model Scale for Cervical Cancer and the Pap Smear Test. Background.  While the Champion Health Belief Model scales have been tested extensively for breast cancer and screening for this, evaluation of these scales in explaining the beliefs of women with regard to cervical cancer and the Pap Smear Test has only received limited attention. Methods.  This methodological research was carried out in Turkey in 2007. The data were collected with 237 randomly selected women who met the criteria for inclusion and agreed to participate in this study. The Champion Health Belief Model scales were translated into Turkish, adapted for cervical cancer, validated by professional experts, translated back into English and pilot-tested. Findings.  Factor analysis yielded five factors: Pap smear benefits and health motivation, Pap smear barriers, seriousness, susceptibility and health motivation. Cronbach's alpha reliability coefficients for the five subscales ranged from 0·62 to 0·86, and test-retest reliability coefficients ranged from 0·79 to 0·87 for the subscales. Conclusion.  The Health Belief Model Scale for Cervical Cancer and the Pap Smear Test was found to be a valid and reliable tool in assessing the women's health beliefs. Understanding the beliefs of women in respect of cervical cancer and the Pap Smear Test will help healthcare professionals to develop more effective cervical cancer screening programmes.
  While mammary Paget's disease (MPD) is clearly linked to breast cancer, the histogenesis of extramammary Paget's disease (EMPD) is controversial. Recently NY-BR-1, a differentiation antigen expressed in the breast and in skin adnexal structures was identified. Its protein expression is restricted to normal and neoplastic breast epithelium and to adnexal tumors of the skin. In this study, we examine NY-BR-1 expression by immunohistochemistry in 24 MPD cases with synchronous ductal carcinoma in situ or invasive breast cancer. Results were compared with 26 cases of EMPD of men (n= 4) and women (n= 22) as well as in apoeccrine glands of the axilla and mammary-like glands of the anogenital region. We found NY-BR-1 positivity in 18 of 24 MPD (75%) and in 21 of 26 EMPD (80.8%). All apoeccrine glands of the axilla and mammary-like glands of the anogenital region were NY-BR-1-positive. NY-BR-1 expression is a common finding in MPD and in EMPD. When considering the diagnosis of Paget's disease, NY-BR-1 is a useful diagnostic marker. Furthermore NY-BR-1 positivity in apoeccrine glands of the axilla and anogenital region suggests a potential histogenetic link between these structures and Paget's disease.
  Aims:  In breast-conserving surgery, the width of free margin around a tumour to ensure adequate excision is controversial. The aim of this study was first to evaluate the frequency of residual disease in wider excision specimens in patients who undergo further surgery because of close margins of < 5 mm. Secondly, the ability of demographic and tumour-related factors to predict the close margins was appraised. Patients and methods:  Three-hundred-and-three patients were included in the study. Patients undergoing wider excision were assessed for the presence of residual disease, and this was tested for association with the width of the initial free margin. Various factors were studied for association with close or involved margins by univariate analysis. Results:  Fifty-three per cent of patients were eligible for re-excision based on the need for a 5-mm clearance. With a free margin of 2 mm or more from invasive tumour, the probability of finding residual disease was 2.4%. The probability of residual disease was higher for ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) and did not decline with increasing the free margin width. Tumour size, lobular cancer type, vascular invasion and nodal involvement were associated with close margins. Conclusions:  We suggest that a free margin of 2 mm from invasive tumour is adequate to minimise residual disease, whereas the equivalent free margin for DCIS remains unclear. Patients with large tumours and lobular cancer type should be counselled at the time of first surgery concerning the higher risk of further excision and mastectomy.
  Runx2 has been proposed as one of the pivotal factors in the process of osteogenesis and metastasis in human malignancies including breast cancer, but its details have not been evaluated. Therefore, in this study, we evaluated its expression in human breast cancer using immunohistochemistry. One hundred and thirty-seven formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded breast cancer specimens were used in this analysis of immunohistochemical study. Immunoreactivity was evaluated using the labeling index (LI). Runx2 immunoreactivity was detected in both carcinoma and stromal cells, as well as non-pathological ductal cells. The nuclear LI of Runx2 in carcinoma cells was associated with the clinical stage, histological grade and HER2 status of the patients examined. In addition, among the patients not associated with distant metastasis, those with high Runx2 LI demonstrated a significantly worse clinical outcome than those with a low LI. This was more pronounced in the group of estrogen receptor (ER)-negative cases. In addition, both univariate and multivariate analyses demonstrated that the Runx2 LI in breast carcinoma cells turned out an independent prognostic factor. Results of our present study demonstrated that Runx2 plays very important roles in the progression of breast cancer, especially in those of ER-negative cases. (Cancer Sci, doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01742.x, 2010).
  Abstract Objective: Awareness of heart disease as the leading cause of death in women has increased over the past 10 years, but little is known about the awareness level of college students. This study evaluated the level of awareness and knowledge of heart disease in women among college students. Methods and Results: Using a cross-sectional design, a sample of 320 women from a private university was queried. A 13-item survey assessed demographic information and awareness of cardiovascular disease (CVD). The mean age was 23 years; the majority were single and of Hispanic ethnicity. Almost one third believed breast cancer was the greatest problem facing women. One half recognized CVD as the leading cause of death among women. Students aged 18&#x2013;24 years were significantly less likely to identify heart disease/heart attack as the leading cause of death in women compared with students aged 25&#x2013;34 years. Significant ethnic differences in perceptions of risk were found. Family history and obesity were seen as major contributors to CVD; less than a fourth ever discussed CVD with their healthcare provider. Information was gained primarily from television, magazines, and the Internet. Exercise and maintenance of healthy blood pressure were viewed as priorities in prevention of CVD. Conclusions: Results add to the body of research on CVD risk and the need for intervention to increase awareness and knowledge of heart disease risk among younger and ethnically diverse young women and raises questions about the role of colleges and universities in promotion of student health. Colleges and universities may provide the last opportunity to reach youth as a group to affect lifestyle changes.
  Ridaforolimus (AP23573; MK 8669) is an analog of sirolimus and a small molecule inhibitor of the mammalian target of rapamycin for the treatment of cancer. Both intravenous and oral formulations of the compound are being tested in clinical trials for the treatment of soft-tissue and bone sarcomas. It is in phase III development for sarcoma in the EU and US, and phase II for breast cancer, endometrial cancer, non-small cell lung cancer, and prostate cancer in the US and other markets in the world. This review discusses the key development milestones and therapeutic trials of this drug.
  It has been indicated that renin-angiotensin system (RAS) has role in various steps of cancer progression. The presence of RAS components has been shown in normal and breast cancer tissue. Insertion/Deletion (I/D) is one of angiotensin I converting enzyme (ACE) polymorphisms and A1166C is one of Angiotensin II type-1 receptor (AT1R) polymorphisms which have been associated with various diseases such as cardiovascular diseases. In the present study, we aimed to substantiate the putative significance of ACE and AT1R on breast cancer biology by investigating the influence of their gene polymorphisms on breast cancer progression. The I/D and A1166C polymorphisms were evaluated by using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP), respectively in 70 breast cancer patients diagnosed with invasive breast cancer and 70 healthy women. Breast cancer prognostic factors were obtained from medical and pathology reports of patients. There was no significant difference between cases and controls for ACE (I/D) (P = 0.15) and AT1R (A1166C) genotypes (P = 0.86). In breast cancer patients, when DD genotype was used as reference group, the combination of II and ID genotypes was associated with increased HER-2 expression (P = 0.020; OR, 4.58; 95% CI, 1.26-16.60). Also, when AA genotype was used as reference group, the AC genotype was associated with higher tumor TNM stage (P = 0.024; OR, 4.66; 95% CI, 1.18-18.35). This is the first study indicating that ACE (I/D) polymorphism is associated with HER-2 expression and AT1R (A1166C) polymorphism is associated with tumor TNM stage in breast cancer patients. Mol. Carcinog. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
  BACKGROUND:: Invasive ductal carcinoma with osteoclast-like giant cells (OGCs) is a very rare breast tumor the main characteristic of which is the presence of multinucleated cells of histiocytic nature. METHODS:: The authors report a study of 8 consecutive cases of fine-needle aspiration cytopathology (FNAC) of breast nodules in which OGCs and malignant epithelial cells were associated and diagnosed as mammary carcinoma with OGCs. These cases were selected over a period of 5 years from more than 6000 patients who were examined during a weekly, single-day, multidisciplinary breast clinic. The corresponding biopsies and surgical specimens were examined histologically in an immunohistochemical study using a histiocytic marker (cluster of differentiation 68 [CD68]). RESULTS:: Conventional histologic analysis made it possible to diagnose 5 of the 8 cases as mammary carcinoma with OGCs; whereas, in the other 3 cases, OGCs were not detected without the help of immunohistochemistry. CONCLUSIONS:: FNAC appeared to be a very efficient way to diagnose breast carcinoma with OGCs, because it detected forms with only a few OGCs that usually are not observed at histologic diagnosis. Consequently, the current results indicated that mammary carcinoma with OGCs may be more frequent than reported previously. Cancer (Cancer Cytopathol) 2010. © 2010 American Cancer Society.
  BACKGROUND:: Women with breast cancer are more likely to have a second breast cancer than women in the general population are to have a primary cancer. However, the biological relationship between primary and second breast cancers is not clear. METHODS:: A total of 30,617 patients diagnosed with bilateral breast cancers between 1990 and 2007 were identified through 17 cancer registries of the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results program. Logistic regression with odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) was used to model strength of association in hormone receptor status, grade, and histology between 2 cancers. RESULTS:: There was a strong association in estrogen receptor status between 2 bilateral tumors (OR, 7.64; 95% CI, 7.00-8.35). The strength of association in estrogen receptor status depended on the time interval between the first and second tumors and age at diagnosis. The OR was 25.9 for synchronous tumors (within 1 month) and 3.69 for metachronous tumors separated by ≥10 years. The strength of association was stronger in patients whose first cancer was diagnosed before age 50 (OR, 11.7) versus after age 50 (OR, 5.71). A similar pattern was observed for progesterone receptor, grade, and histological type, but with relatively weaker association. CONCLUSIONS:: The strong concordance in hormone receptor status of primary and second breast cancers suggests that 2 breast cancers arise in a common milieu and that tumor subtypes are predetermined in the early stage of breast carcinogenesis. Cancer 2010. © 2010 American Cancer Society.
  BACKGROUND:: Although the use of SSM is becoming more common, there are few data on long-term, local-regional, and distant recurrence rates after treatment. The purpose of this study was to examine the rates of local, regional, and systemic recurrence, and survival in breast cancer patients who underwent skin-sparing mastectomy (SSM) or conventional mastectomy (CM) at our institution. METHODS:: Patients with stage 0 to III unilateral breast cancer who underwent total mastectomy at our center from 2000 to 2005 were included in this study. Kaplan-Meier curves were calculated, and the log-rank test was used to evaluate the differences between overall and disease-free survival rates in the 2 groups. RESULTS:: Of 1810 patients, 799 (44.1%) underwent SSM and 1011 (55.9%) underwent CM. Patients who underwent CM were older (58.3 vs 49.3 years, P<.0001) and were more likely to have stage IIB or III disease (53.0% vs 31.8%, P<.0001). Significantly more patients in the CM group received neoadjuvant chemotherapy and adjuvant radiation therapy (P<.0001). At a median follow-up of 53 months, 119 patients (6.6%) had local, regional, or systemic recurrences. The local, regional, and systemic recurrence rates did not differ significantly between the SSM and CM groups. After adjusting for clinical TNM stage and age, disease-free survival rates between the SSM and CM groups did not differ significantly. CONCLUSIONS:: SSM is an acceptable treatment option for patients who are candidates for immediate breast reconstruction. Local-regional recurrence rates are similar to those of patients undergoing CM. Cancer 2010. © 2010 American Cancer Society.
  In Europe one out of every nine women suffers from breast cancer during her lifetime. Since the introduction of mammography screening programs more breast cancers are being diagnosed when they are still small and early stage cancers with a favourable prognosis. The introduction of digital mammography systems has led to a continuous reduction of breast cancer mortality especially in specific patient subgroups. Furthermore, the digital mammography platform enables the development of new, innovative breast imaging methods to increase sensitivity and decrease breast cancer mortality. This digital mammography platform includes digital breast tomosynthesis, digital contrast medium mammography and digital contrast medium breast tomosynthesis as well as fused data sets from digital mammography with ultrasound or MRI. The following article summarizes these new applications, describes the strengths of the digital platform and illustrates the potential advantages of an improved breast cancer diagnosis by digital mammography.
  Women with an elevated risk for breast cancer require intensified screening beginning at an early age. Such high risk screening differs considerably from screening in the general population. After an expert has evaluated the exact risk a breast MRI examination should be offered at least once a year and beginning latest at the age of 30 depending on the patients risk category. Complementary mammograms should not be performed before the age of 35. An additional ultrasound examination is no longer recommended. To ensure a high sensitivity and specificity high risk screening should be performed only at a nationally or regionally approved and audited service. Adequate knowledge about the phenotypical characteristics of familial breast cancer is essential. Besides the common malignant phenotypes, benign morphologies (round or oval shape and smooth margins) as well as a low prevalence of calcifications have been described. Using MRI benign contrast media kinetics as well as non-solid lesions with focal, regional and segmental enhancement can often be visualized.
  INTRODUCTION: As with other illnesses, several variables can impact the transition back to the workplace, long-term work productivity, or job retention among cancer survivors. We developed a model related to work and cancer based in part on the general area of work disability and the specific literature on cancer survivors and work. METHODS: A systematic search of the literature on work and cancer was conducted to determine whether an evidence base existed to support the proposed model. RESULTS: Forty-five papers met the review criteria. The percentage of studies that addressed modifiable categories included in the proposed model was: health and well-being (20%), symptoms (16%), function (24%), work demands (9%), work environment (18%), and policy, procedures, and economic factors (16%). Return to work was the most common work outcome studied although problems with productivity and retention are reported in the general cancer and work literature. Wide variation in definition of cancer survivor was reported and breast cancer survivors were studied most often. Each of the categories in the model has some empirical support. DISCUSSION: The model considers the health, functional status in relation to demands, work environment, and policy, procedures, and financial factors. The model allows the clinician and survivor to consider factors that can be addressed by the health care provider, survivor, and workplace. Implications for Cancer Survivors. This model provides a framework to aid in conceptualizing problems related to work.
  Every-2-week (dose-dense) adjuvant doxorubicin (A) plus cyclophosphamide (C) followed by paclitaxel is a safe and effective adjuvant chemotherapy regimen. Every-3-week nab-paclitaxel is safe and more effective at 50% higher dose than every-3-week paclitaxel in metastatic breast cancer (BC). This study evaluated the safety of adjuvant dose-dense AC followed by dose-dense nab-paclitaxel for early-stage BC. Women with operable, histologically confirmed BC received four cycles of dose-dense A 60 mg/m(2) plus C 600 mg/m(2) with pegfilgrastim, followed by dose-dense 260 mg/m(2) nab-paclitaxel (with pegfilgrastim given as needed). Endpoints were adverse events (AEs), including myelosuppression. Patients with neuropathy were followed until symptom improvement to grade ≤1. Thirty women received four cycles of dose-dense AC with no unanticipated AEs, one withdrew after AC therapy. Of 29 women who began nab-paclitaxel therapy, 27 received all the four doses (mean cumulative dose, 959 mg/m(2)); one discontinued nab-paclitaxel after two doses due to unacceptable AEs. Four patients had a grade 3 nab-paclitaxel-related neuropathy (no grade 4 event). Of 29 patients, 34% received pegfilgrastim during nab-paclitaxel therapy and 31% had a nab-paclitaxel treatment delay, mainly due to hematologic toxicity. Based on the Kaplan-Meier probability estimates, the percentage of patients having ≤1 grade neuropathy at the end of treatment, 2, and 8 months after treatment were 59, 79, and 97%. Administering adjuvant dose-dense AC followed by 260 mg/m(2) dose-dense nab-paclitaxel was feasible in women with early-stage BC, with manageable AEs. Most patients had ≤1 grade neuropathy 2 months after treatment completion.
  Breast cancer patients must often decide between multiple adjuvant therapy options to prevent cancer recurrence. Standard practice, as implemented in current decision support tools, is to present information about all options simultaneously, but psychology research suggests that sequential decision processes might improve decision making. We tested whether asking women to consider hormonal therapy and chemotherapy separately would improve women's risk knowledge and/or affect treatment intentions. We conducted an Internet-administered experimental survey of a demographically diverse sample of 1,781 women ages 40-74. Participants were randomized to experience a standard, comprehensive decision process versus sequential (one at a time) decisions regarding adjuvant therapy options for a hypothetical breast cancer patient with an estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) tumor. We assessed comprehension of key statistics, perceptions of treatment effectiveness, and perceived interest in adjuvant chemotherapy, as well as participants' numeracy levels. When participants made sequential decisions, they demonstrated greater comprehension of decision-relevant risk statistics, as compared to when they made decisions all at once (all P's < 0.001). Among higher-numeracy participants, those making sequential decisions were less interested in chemotherapy (P < 0.001). Lower-numeracy participants who considered all options simultaneously were insensitive to the degree of risk reduction, but those who made sequential decisions were sensitive (P = 0.03). In conclusion, presenting adjuvant therapy options sequentially improves women's comprehension of incremental treatment benefit and increases less numerate women's sensitivity to the magnitude of the achievable risk reduction over standard, all at once approaches. Sequential approaches to adjuvant therapy decisions may reduce use of chemotherapy among those at low risk for recurrence.
  Phyllodes tumors of the breast are rare fibroepithelial neoplasms with a potential for recurrence. Current histological classification is not always predictive of clinical behavior. The aim of this study was to identify genetic changes associated with the development of borderline and malignant phyllodes tumors in an Asian population, and to assess if genetic data supported the categorization of these tumors into the existing three grades of benign, borderline, and malignant. Expression profiling of 21 phyllodes tumors (6 benign, 10 borderline, 5 malignant) was performed using Affymetrix U133Plus 2.0 GeneChips(®). Gene expression among benign, borderline, and malignant tumors was compared and a 29 gene list was able to classify them according to their histologic grade. Among these 29 genes are those responsible for matrix formation, cell adhesion, epidermis formation, and cell proliferation. Comparative genomic microarray analysis showed that the most common chromosomal alteration associated with borderline and malignant tumors was 1q gain, and an increasing number of chromosomal changes was noted with increasing histological grade. Upregulation of HOXB13 was seen in malignant relative to borderline phyllodes tumors and further investigated by immunohistochemistry in a corresponding set of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumors. HOXB13 protein overexpression was found to be correlated with stromal hypercellularity and atypia (P = 0.03, P = 0.039, respectively) and may be implicated in the development of malignant phyllodes tumors.
  Flat epithelial atypia (FEA) is recognized as a precursor of breast cancer and its management (surgical excision or intensive follow-up) remains unclear after diagnosis on core needle biopsy (CNB). The aim of this study was to determine the underestimation rate of pure FEA on CNB and clinical, radiological, and pathological factors of underestimation. 4,062 CNBs from 5 breast cancer centers, performed over a 5-year period, were evaluated. A CNB diagnosis of pure FEA was made in 60 cases (1.5%) (the presence of atypical ductal hyperplasia, lobular neoplasia, radial scars, phyllodes tumor, papillary lesions, ductal carcinoma in situ or invasive carcinoma at CNB were exclusion criteria), and subsequent surgical excision was systematically performed. The histological diagnosis was retrospectively reviewed using standardized criteria and the precise terminology of the World Health Organization by two pathologist physicians. At surgical excision, 6 (10%) ductal carcinoma in situ and 2 (3%) invasive carcinoma were diagnosed. The total underestimation rate was 13%. FEA was associated with atypical ductal hyperplasia in 10 (17%) cases and with lobular neoplasia in 2 (3%) at final pathology. Residual FEA was found in 14 (23%) cases. No clinical, radiological or pathological factors were significantly associated with underestimation. Our data highlight the importance of recognizing and diagnosing FEA in core needle biopsies. Thus, the presence of FEA on CNB, even in isolation, warrants follow-up excision.
  The mTOR pathway is pivotal not only in tumorigenesis but also in chemotherapy and hormonal drug sensitivity. It is clear that improvements in using new targeted therapies are required to improve breast cancer (BC) outcome. Nevertheless, to achieve this, new molecular biomarkers are required to define the potential sensitivity or resistance of cancer cells. By targeting the mTOR pathway, several critical central transduction pathways that sustain BC are abrogated (HER-2/Neu and the estrogen receptor pathway). Thus, the compounds that inhibit mTOR have a double mechanism of toxicity on BC cells when used in combination with a currently used drug: (1) overcoming primary drug resistance and (2) restoring sensitivity when resistance arises after long-term exposure. This review covers the utility of inhibitors of the mTOR pathway in BC and emphasizes the new paradigm of close symbiosis between oncology and molecular biology to better profiling and treating BC with a targeted approach. In particular, we focused on the new drug RAD001 (Everolimus) due to the great results from preclinical and clinical trials make it the most hopeful compound among mTOR inhibitors for the treatment of BC.
  The symptoms of ovarian tumor are not specific and a rare presentation of the tumor is as the content of an inguinal hernia. We reported a case of an 82-year-old woman, diagnosed with breast cancer and with a concomitant hypoecoic adnexal mass at the ecographic exam. The patient was treated with conservative breast surgery and laparotomy. A cystic-solid ovarian lesion was found inside the right inguinal canal. Frozen-section examination was negative for malignancy, and the anatomopathological analysis revealed a borderline ovarian tumor.
  BACKGROUND: S-1 is an orally administered fluorinated pyrimidine with high activity in metastatic breast carcinoma (MBC) and in chemotherapy-pretreated metastatic breast carcinoma. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Forty patients with MBC who did not respond to capecitabine-based chemo-therapy and then received S-1 were identified from our data base of records between 2006 and 2008. The clinico-pathological data and outcomes of these patients were then reviewed. RESULTS: The overall response rate was 27.8%. The median survival was 19.2 months, and the median time to disease progression was 6.2 months. The most common treatment-related adverse events (all grades) were hand-foot syndrome (15%), nausea (15%), vomiting (7.5%), disorder of taste (7.5%), and diarrhea (5%). However, the majority were mild to moderate in intensity, and only one patient experienced grade 3 (according to the National Cancer Institute of Canada Common Toxicity criteria) adverse events. Myelosuppression and alopecia were rare, and there were no reported treatment-related deaths. CONCLUSION: The results of the current study demonstrate that S-1 is an effective and well-tolerated treatment in patients with capecitabine-resistant MBC. In addition, it is a convenient, orally administered drug, which makes it an attractive agent for use in outpatient treatment.
  BACKGROUND: 5-HTTLPR genetic polymorphism of serotonin transporter (SERT) and stressful life events facilitate depression. The aim of this investigation was therefore to determine the correlations between SERT polymorphism and mental adjustement to cancer. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Breast cancer patients early after surgery, and subjects with various advanced tumours were recruited, evaluated using the Mini Mental Adjustment to Cancer Scale and Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS), and genotyped. RESULTS: In early breast cancer patients (n=53), hopelessness-helplessness (HH) and anxious preoccupation (AP) significantly correlated with depression and anxiety; avoidance (AV) correlated with anxiety. Advanced cancer patients (n=73) displayed similar correlations, and a negative correlation of HADS depression with fighting spirit (FS) and AV. The stratification for 5-HTTLPR showed that early breast cancer carriers of the L/L variant displayed a significant correlation between HH and depression. CONCLUSION: Among early breast cancer patients, a specific set, characterized by their 5-HTTLPR variant, display differential correlations between HH and depression, with possible implications for treatment options.
  Aim: This was a phase II study to assess the activity of a novel neoadjuvant regimen in locally-advanced breast cancer. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Fifty patients with histological confirmation of locally advanced breast cancer received treatment with gemcitabine 1000 mg/m(2) (day 1) followed by gemcitabine 800 mg/m(2) plus docetaxel 75 mg/m(2) plus pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (PLD) 30 mg/m(2) (day 8) every 3 weeks for at least 4 cycles, plus a final 2 additional cycles. Tumour size was T1 (n=2), T2 (n=32), T3 (n=14), T4 (n=2). All 50 patients underwent surgery. RESULTS: Clinical complete, partial and no response were observed in 13 (26%), 24 (48%) and 11 (22%) patients, respectively (overall response rate: 74%). The number of chemotherapy cycles was found to be an independent predictor of a pathologic complete response. CONCLUSION: The combination of gemcitabine-docetaxel-PLD can yield high tumour response rates in patients with locally-advanced breast cancer who undergo a full treatment of 6 cycles.
  BACKGROUND: Adverse outcomes in breast cancer patients treated with recombinant human erythropoietin (rhEpo) have been linked to the expression of Epo-receptors (EpoR) in cancer cells, although limited data on the clinical significance of these observations are available. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Tissue samples from 107 patients with breast cancer who did not receive rhEpo and from 12 patients with benign lesions were retrospectively analysed for EpoR expression by RT-PCR and Western blot, and the results were correlated to clinical and demographic data. RESULTS: While EpoR levels were not linked to anaemia or inflammation, they were positively associated with progesterone and oestrogen receptor status. Patients with increased EpoR-mRNA expression had a higher local cancer recurrence rate (p=0.021), however, no significant difference in overall survival was observed. CONCLUSION: Since EpoR expression is associated with hormone receptor positivity and decreased locoregional disease control, this parameter characterises a specific cancer phenotype rather than being a negative predictor itself.
  Metastatic tumours of the stomach have been reported to result from various types of cancer. Among them, gastric metastasis from breast cancer has been recognised in 0.3-18% patients (1-4). Here, a rare case of metastatic gastric tumour derived from breast carcinoma is reported. Gastric endoscopy confirmed a large, friable mass (approximately 5 cm in diameter) in the upper part of the gastric body. The mass within the stomach was difficult to distinguish from primary gastric cancer, although biopsies of this lesion revealed the characteristics of adenocarcinoma. In addition, immunohistochemistry showed the positive expression of mammaglobin. Taken together, the evidence pointed to metastasis of breast cancer to the stomach. The patient was treated with hormonal therapy (letrozole), and the size of the metastasis in the stomach was markedly reduced. Therefore, a gastric metastasis from breast cancer was diagnosed successfully using immunohistochemistry and unnecessary surgery was avoided. In conclusion, although gastric metastatic tumours derived from breast carcinoma are rare, their accurate pre-operative diagnosis and appropriate systemic treatment is essential.
  BACKGROUND: The potential for radiofrequency ablation (RFA) therapy is an area of increasing interest in the context of breast conserving therapy for breast cancer. This non surgical technique potentially provides a non invasive, cosmetically pleasing result that is preferable to surgeon and patient. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A literature review was carried out facilitated by PubMed and Medline databases. Cross referencing of the obtained articles was used to identify other relevant studies. A total of 17 studies were reviewd. RESULTS: RFA is emerging as a promising treatment for breast cancer. Pilot and phase II studies have shown RFA to be effective at ablation with few complications or adverse effects experienced by patients. However, complete ablation of tumours is still not achieved in all patients. CONCLUSION: RFA represents a promising therapeutic medality for breast lesions. However, there is a clear need for further research and refinement of the procedure before it can be offered as a therapeutic alternative to surgical excision for operable breast cancer.
  Previously, we and other groups reported that liver X receptor (LXR) agonists T0901317, 22(R)-hydroxycholesterol, and 24(S)-hydroxycholesterol suppressed the proliferation of prostate and breast cancer cells. In this study, we report that T0901317 and 22(R)-hydroxycholesterol treatment inhibited the proliferation of different progression stages of LNCaP human prostate cancer cells, as well as different commonly used human cancer cell lines. Cancer cell lines with higher LXRα mRNA expression were more sensitive to 22(R)-hydroxycholesterol-induced inhibition. T0901317 treatment decreased the percentage of the cell population in S-phase and caused G(1) cell cycle arrest. Overexpression of S-phase kinase-associated protein 2 (Skp2) partially blocked the suppressive effect of T0901317 treatment. Modulating LXR signaling is therefore a potential adjuvant therapy for advanced prostate cancer and other types of cancer.
  BACKGROUND: In human breast cancer, a growth status switched from estrogen-dependent to growth factor-dependent is a critical step during development of acquired tamoxifen resistance. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying this switch remain poorly understood. The Wilms' tumor suppressor gene, WT1, encodes a zinc-finger protein WT1 that functions as a transcription regulator. High levels of the WT1 expression have been associated with de novo tamoxifen resistance. The goal of this study was to investigate the function of WT1 in acquired tamoxifen resistance. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A stable tamoxifen-resistance cell line MCF7(TAM) was established by selecting ER-positive breast cancer MCF7 cells in a medium containing tamoxifen. Western blot, cell growth assay and shRNA method were used to examine the role of WT1 in acquired tamoxifen resistance. RESULTS: MCF7(TAM) cells expressed EGFR, HER2 and WT1 at higher levels compared to tamoxifen-sensitive parental MCF7 cells. MCF7(TAM) cells responded weakly to estrogen stimulation, grew rapidly in the absence of estrogen and were insensitive to tamoxifen. We also established stable cell lines from MCF7(TAM) cells to express shRNA specific for WT1, and found expression levels of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), HER2 and estrogen receptor (ER)-α to be down-regulated in MCF7(TAM) cells with knocked-down levels of WT1 expression. MCF7(TAM) cells with WT1 expression knocked-down by shRNA still retained tamoxifen insensitivity. CONCLUSION: Our results indicated that WT1 is involved in expressional regulation of the EGFR family members and ER-α during development of acquired tamoxifen resistance.
  We sought to determine the molecular basis for the anticancer activities of 5,3'-dihydroxy-3,6,7,8,4'-pentamethoxyflavone (DH-PMF), isolated from Gardenia obtusifolia traditionally used in Thailand for a variety of ailments. As little as 1 μM DH-PMF inhibited the proliferation of prostate, colon, kidney, lung, head and neck, pancreas, breast, leukemia, and myeloma cancer cell lines. DH-PMF also suppressed the colony-forming ability of tumor cells, with 50% inhibition occurring at a dose less than 10 nM. DH-PMF induced G(2)/M and subG(1) cell cycle arrest, increased the levels of p21(WAF1/CIP1) and p27(KIP1), and reduced the expression of cyclin D1, CDC2, and c-MYC. Furthermore, DH-PMF inhibited AKT and glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK3β) activation, reduced cell survival proteins, and induced apoptosis, as indicated by annexin V staining, TUNEL assay, and activation of caspase-8, -9 and -3. Overall, our results demonstrate that DH-PMF induces suppression of cell proliferation through modulation of AKT-GSK3β pathways and induction of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitors.
  The objective of this study was to evaluate the expression of MMP-2 and MMP-9 in sentinel lymph node and serum of breast cancer patients in order to evaluate their clinical significance and usefulness as diagnostic tumour markers. Expression of MMP-2 and MMP-9 was performed on sentinel lymph node by immunohistochemistry while gelatine zymography was used to determinate the serum expression. The association of gelatinases with clinicopathological features, were analysed. Metastatic and non-metastatic breast cancer patients and 34 healthy women were involved. Gelatinases expression were significantly higher in metastatic breast cancer in comparison to non-metastatic cancer and the control group both in the sentinel lymph node and serum. Results showed a statistically significant correlation between MMP-2 or MMP-9 and cancer familiality, MMP-9 and CA 15.3 levels, and MMP-9 and grading. This study suggests a clinical utility of these proteolytic markers in malignant tumour, growth, invasion and metastasis in breast cancer.
  BACKGROUND: Aromatase inhibitor (AI) has been established as an effective endocrine therapy in estrogen receptor (ER)-positive postmenopausal breast cancer patients. Our recent proteomic analysis demonstrated that ten proteins were significantly altered in their expression levels before and after the therapy in the patients receiving neoadjuvant AI. Among these newly identified proteins, heat-shock protein 70 (HSP-70) was the most significantly correlated with both clinical and pathological responses. Therefore, in this study, we further evaluated the significance of this HSP-70 alteration using immunohistochemistry. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 32 patients treated with neoadjuvant exemestane or letrozole in whom pre- and post-treatment tumor tissues were available were included. Immunohistochemical evaluation of ER, progesterone receptor (PgR), Her-2, Ki-67 and HSP-70 was performed. Results obtained were compared to both clinical and biological responses of the patients. RESULTS: The majority of the patients responded to treatment (16 patients with partial response, 14 with stable disease and 2 with progressive disease). The means of ER, Ki-67 and HSP-70 were significantly different between treatment responders and non-responders. Decrement of HSP-70 and Ki-67 after AI treatment and pretreatment Ki-67 labeling index of >10% tumor cells were significantly associated with clinical responsiveness to AI treatment (p<0.0001). There was a significant positive correlation between changes of HSP-70 and Ki-67 before and after the therapy. CONCLUSION: Decrement of HSP-70 in breast carcinoma cells plays important roles in therapeutic mechanisms of AIs through suppressing tumor cell proliferation in breast cancer patients.
  BACKGROUND: High frequencies of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) are found in familial breast carcinomas with BRCA mutations. Although LOH of BRCA1 does not coincide with somatic BRCA1 mutations, reduced BRCA1 protein expression and hypermethylation indicate the involvement of BRCA1 in sporadic carcinogenesis. To further investigate the role of BRCA we determined LOH of BRCA1 and correlated this with LOH in other breast cancer-associated regions. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 105 sporadic breast carcinomas were analysed for LOH in the regions of BRCA1, BRCA2, TP53, Caveolin1, "putative BRCA3", PTEN, ATM and E-cadherin and correlated it with clinicopathological features. RESULTS: We found an overall increase of LOH in carcinomas with simultaneous LOH of BRCA1. Significantly higher LOH rates were detected in the regions of TP53 (80%: 34.7%; p<0.005), 8q21 (72.7%: 30.6%; p<0.010) and 10q22-23 (21.1%: 5.9%; p=0.043). Moreover, estrogen receptor-negative carcinomas revealed LOH of BRCA1 more frequently than estrogen receptor-positive carcinomas (39%: 12%; p=0.003). CONCLUSION: These data indicate that LOH of BRCA1 coincides with a defect of the DNA repair pathway. Therefore, LOH of BRCA1 determines a subgroup of sporadic breast carcinomas sharing genotype/phenotype features with familial breast carcinomas.
  BACKGROUND: Downstream signaling is a key component of Her2/neu overexpression in human breast cancer. Major survival pathways downstream of Her2/neu include mitogen and stress activated protein kinases (ERK, JNK, p38). MATERIALS AND METHODS: MAPK protein expression was examined in mouse and human cancer tissue. MAPK expression was inhibited by genetic and pharmacologic methods in human breast cancer cell lines. The effects of MAPK inhibition on tumor formation in a preclinical model were determined. RESULTS: It was shown that tumors from MMTV-neu mice expressed high levels of activated JNK1. Levels of this kinase were also highest in Her2/neu overexpressing human breast cancer cell lines. JNK1 inhibition specifically induced apoptosis in these lines. A JNK1 inhibitor also increased the latency period and decreased growth of MMTV-neu tumors by induction of apoptosis. JNK1 was preferentially activated in human breast cancer tissue overexpressing Her2/neu. CONCLUSION: JNK1 promotes cell survival in Her2/neu-positive breast cancer.
  Aim: Sulforaphane (SFN), which is present in cruciferous vegetables, induces growth arrest and/or cell death in cancer of various organs. The involvement of autophagy in the SFN-induced apoptotic death of human breast cancer cells was investigated. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Cell proliferation and viability was assessed by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay and trypan blue exclusion assay. Flow cytometry, immunofluorescence, electron microscopy, and Western blot analysis were used for detection of apoptosis and autophagy, and the role of autophagy was assessed using autophagy inhibitors. RESULTS: SFN dose- and time-dependently retarded the growth and induced cell death in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells. In MDA-MB-231 cells, 30 μM SFN caused S and G(2)/M cell-cycle arrest associated with increased p21(WAF1) and p27(KIP1) levels and decreased cyclin A, cyclin B1 and CDC2 levels. Cell death was due to apoptosis with increased caspase-3 and lowered BCL-2 levels. In addition, the SFN-treated cells exhibited autophagy, as characterized by the appearance of autophagic vacuoles by electron microscopy, the accumulation of acidic vesicular organelles by flow cytometry, and the punctuate patterns of microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 (LC3) by fluorescein microscopy. The levels of LC3-I and -II proteins (processed forms of LC3-I) and LC3 mRNA were increased. Treatment with autophagy inhibitor bafilomycin A1 (but not 3-methyladenine) with SFN significantly enhanced apoptosis, which was accompanied by increases in the level of BAX and the cleavage of caspase-3 and poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase (PARP)-1 and decreases in the mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm). CONCLUSION: These results indicate a cytoprotective role of autophagy against SFN-induced apoptosis and that the combination of SFN treatment with autophagy inhibition may be a promising strategy for breast cancer control.
  BACKGROUND: SET domain containing protein 2 (SETD2) is a histone methyltransferase that is involved in transcriptional elongation. We previously demonstrated SETD2 to be a potential tumour suppressor gene in breast cancer. The aim of this study was to compare SETD2 expression in breast cancer with that in adjacent non-cancerous breast tissue (ANCT) in paired samples. A hypothesis is proposed that explains the mode of action of SETD2 as a tumour suppressor gene. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Paired samples of tumour and adjacent non-cancerous tissue (ANCT) from 25 patients were analysed. The levels of transcription of SETD2 were determined using quantitative polymerase chain reaction and normalized against cytokeratin 19. Immunohistochemical staining with appropriate antibodies against SETD2 protein was also performed in selected samples. RESULTS: Levels of SETD2 mRNA were significantly higher in ANCT when compared to those in tumour samples (p=0.01). Immunohistochemistry also demonstrated a higher protein expression in ANCT. CONCLUSION: This study offers further evidence that SETD2 behaves like a tumour suppressor gene. Our hypothesis links SETD2 mode of action with telomerase regulation through human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT). Several studies have emphasised the importance of histone methylation of hTERT promotor in telomerase regulation. SETD2 function of histone methylation could be the missing link in this chain which could explain the potential tumour suppressor function of SETD2.
  PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog) loss of function is the most common genetic aberration in endometrioid endometrial carcinomas. In addition to its well-described role in cell signaling, PTEN is involved in the maintenance of genomic stability. Loss of PTEN function causes defects in repair of DNA double-strand breaks by homologous recombination and, therefore, sensitizes cells to inhibition of the poly(adenosine diphosphate ribose) polymerase (PARP). Here, we determined the PTEN status of eight endometrioid endometrial carcinoma cell lines and correlated it with in vitro sensitivity to the PARP inhibitor KU0058948. PTEN-deficient cells showed a significantly greater sensitivity to KU0058948 than the two endometrioid endometrial carcinoma cell lines with wild-type PTEN. The cell lines lacking PTEN expression were unable to elicit a homologous recombination damage response as assayed by RAD51 focus function (a marker of competent homologous recombination DNA repair) upon irradiation and treatment with PARP inhibitors. PTEN silencing in PTEN wild-type Hec-1b cells resulted in reduced RAD51 foci formation after DNA damage and increased sensitivity to PARP inhibition. PTEN reexpression in PTEN-null cell lines resulted in enhanced RAD51 foci formation and in relative resistance to KU0058948. Given that up to 80% of endometrioid endometrial cancers lack PTEN expression, our results suggest that PARP inhibitors may be therapeutically useful for a subset of endometrioid endometrial cancers.
  BACKGROUND: About 20% of women with ovarian cancer have low to typical concentrations of serum carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA125), and this important tumor marker cannot be used to monitor their disease. The measured concentration for mucin 1 (MUC1), or CA15-3, another tumor marker, can be lowered in breast and ovarian cancer patients when circulating immune complexes (CICs) containing antibodies bound to the free antigen are present. Because CA125 and MUC1 are related members of the mucin family, we sought to determine whether CICs might also exist for CA125 and interfere with its clinical assay. METHODS: We developed an antigen capture- based assay to determine the presence of CICs for CA125. We spotted mouse antibodies to CA125 onto nanoparticle slides, incubated them with patient serum, and added Cy5-tagged goat antihuman IgG antibodies. Fluorescence intensities were read and normalized to the intensities for glutathione S-transferase A1 as a control. RESULTS: Assay results for 23 ovarian cancer cases with high CA125 concentrations, 43 cases with low CA125 concentrations, and 19 controls (mean CA125 concentrations, 2706, 23, and 11 kilounits/L, respectively) revealed mean fluorescence intensities for CA125 CIC of 2.30, 2.72, and 1.99 intensity units (iu), respectively. A generalized linear model adjusted for batch and age showed higher CA125 CIC fluorescence intensities in low-CA125 cases than in high-CA125 cases (P = 0.03) and controls (P = 0.0005). Four ovarian cancer patients who had recurrent disease and always had typical CA125 values had a mean CA125 CIC value of 3.06 iu (95% CI, 2.34-4.01 iu). CONCLUSIONS: These preliminary results suggest the existence of CICs involving CA125, which may help explain some ovarian cancer cases with typical CA125 concentrations.
  Estrogen action, via both nuclear and extranuclear estrogen receptors (ERs), induces a variety of cellular signals that are prosurvival or proliferative, whereas nitric oxide (NO) can inhibit apoptosis via caspase S-nitrosylation and via activation of soluble guanylyl cyclase to produce cGMP. The action of 17β-estradiol (E2) at ER is known to elicit NO signaling via activation of NO synthase (NOS) in many tissues. The MCF-10A nontumorigenic, mammary epithelial cell line is genetically stable and insensitive to estrogenic proliferation. In this cell line, estrogens or NOS inhibitors alone had no significant effect, whereas in combination, apoptosis was induced rapidly in the absence of serum; the presence of inducible NOS was confirmed by proteomic analysis. The application of pharmacological agents determined that apoptosis was dependent upon NO/cGMP signaling via cyclic GMP (cGMP)-dependent protein kinase and could be replicated by inhibition of the phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase/serine-threonine kinase pathway prior to addition of E2. Apoptosis was confirmed by nuclear staining and increased caspase-3 activity in E2 + NOS inhibitor-treated cells. Apoptosis was partially inhibited by a pure ER antagonist and replicated by agonists selective for extranuclear ER. Cells were rescued from E2-induced apoptosis after NOS blockade, by NO-donors and cGMP pathway agonists; preincubation with NO donors was required. The NOS and ER status of breast cancer tissues is significant in etiology, prognosis, and therapy. In this study, apoptosis of preneoplastic mammary epithelial cells was triggered by estrogens via a rapid, extranuclear ER-mediated response, after removal of an antiapoptotic NO/cGMP/cGMP-dependent protein kinase signal.
  The HER family of receptors consists of four closely related type 1 transmembrane TK receptors: HER1 (EGFR), HER2, HER3 and HER4. Signalling via the HER family of receptors underpins the majority of the intricate array of cellular activities on which cell survival and functionality depend. Aberrant HER2 expression and/or functionality have been implicated in the evolution of breast cancer and this receptor has proved to be a potent target for anticancer therapies, including antibody-based therapies to prevent ligand binding, dimer formation or the recruitment of antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity, and direct kinase inhibition to prevent molecular activation and recruitment of downstream signalling partners. Novel strategies against HER2 include HER tyrosine kinase inhibitors, HSP90 inhibitors and antibody-chemotherapy conjugates. This latter approach is exemplified by T-DM1, a potent antibody that has a good safety profile and that has shown remarkable activity in patients with advanced disease. In addition, pertuzumab, an mAb that directly inhibits the formation of HER2 dimers including the HER2:HER3 dimer, offers a unique mechanism of HER3 inhibition. All these approaches have shown substantial clinical activity in patients refractory to trastuzumab. It is anticipated that with the increased availability of novel anti-HER2 agents together with a better understanding of the mechanisms of resistance to anti-HER2 agents we should be able to further improve the outcome of patients with HER2 breast cancer. There will also be an increasing tendency towards moving the study of these agents to earlier stages of the disease, namely in the adjuvant and neoadjuvant setting.
  Since the identification of BRCA 1 and 2 in 1995, testing for mutations in these genes has been offered to cancer patients and their families by clinical genetics services. These services are provided across Europe by a small number of health professionals, and are therefore low volume, and low capacity and patients experience considerable delays, both in seeing a clinician and in laboratory testing. The UK private sector, driven by consumer demand and professional competition, has significantly reduced these delays. The development of a new class of therapeutic agent, the PARP inhibitors, is likely to drive the BRCA testing services towards the UK private sector model with much faster turnaround times. Several new genetic tests are now available including CYP 2D6 genotype analysis and the BCtect test. The clinical interpretation of these tests is complex, and the professional community has been naturally cautious about adopting new tests in clinical care. This article will examine the consequences of expected changes in BRCA testing practice, and consider the positioning of new tests in the patient pathway, and the messages given by health professionals.
  Triple-negative [estrogen receptor (ER)-/progesterone receptor (PR)-/HER2-] breast cancers account for ∼15% of overall breast cancers. Triple-negative breast cancers demonstrate a panel of specific molecular alterations including a high rate of p53 mutations, frequent loss of function of BRCA1, phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) loss and a specific panel of tyrosine kinase activation [fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2)]. This molecular entity is considered as sensitive to chemotherapy in the adjuvant setting. When metastatic, the disease is usually aggressive and drug resistant, leading to cancer death within 18 months for the majority of patients. There is no evidence from randomized trials that triple-negative breast cancers have a different sensitivity to specific chemotherapy compared with other molecular classes. Similar findings have been reported for bevacizumab. Several recent research efforts have focused on this entity in the last few years. DNA alkylating agents have shown promising activity in the neoadjuvant setting, but no evidence from a phase III trial currently supports its use. Several targeted therapies are also being successfully developed. Poly(ADP ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) inhibitors induce tumor response as a single agent in BRCA1-mutated breast cancer, and could sensitize cisplatin in the whole triple negative population. Several other targeted agents are being developed in this setting, including epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), FGFR2, mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and NOTCH inhibitors.
  Cancer treatment-induced bone loss (CTIBL) is generally more rapid and severe than bone loss associated with menopause in women or ageing in men and women. In premenopausal women with breast cancer, CTIBL is mainly caused by chemotherapy with resultant ovarian failure, by GnRH agonists or by tamoxifen. In postmenopausal women, steroidal and non-steroidal aromatase inhibitors (AIs) increase bone turnover, decrease bone mass and increase fracture rate (hazard ratio increased to 1.38-1.55 compared with tamoxifen). Zoledronic acid can prevent bone loss in premenopausal women receiving adjuvant therapy with goserelin in combination with either anastrozole or tamoxifen and in postmenopausal women receiving AIs. Denosumab has been shown in a placebo-controlled study to significantly increase bone mineral density in postmenopausal women under AIs. More limited studies indicate that oral bisphosphonates used at licensed doses for the treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis can also prevent AI-induced bone loss. In prostate cancer, bone loss that occurs with androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) also leads to an increased fracture rate. The bisphosphonates pamidronate and alendronate can prevent bone loss whereas zoledronic acid can increase bone mass under ADT. As for breast cancer, delay in bisphosphonate therapy is detrimental to bone health. The protective effects of denosumab on bone loss and incidental vertebral fractures have been demonstrated in a 3-year placebo-controlled trial.
  The prognosis of pT1N0M0/stage I breast cancer has generally been considered so favourable that these patients are not routinely offered adjuvant systemic therapy. However, biological heterogeneity within pT1N0M0 dictates diverse outcomes within the subgroup. HER2 gene amplification or protein overexpression is uncommon in pT1N0M0 disease, but, when present, is clearly associated with a higher risk of recurrence. The role of anti-HER2 therapy in these patients is controversial. Few women with node-negative, small tumours were included in the adjuvant trastuzumab trials. There are no robust data on trastuzumab in this patient subset, although subgroup analyses suggest that proportional benefits are independent of T and N. With current guidelines and scheduling, committing to adjuvant trastuzumab involves concurrent chemotherapy, 1 year of treatment and potential cardiotoxicity. A further challenge with anti-HER2 therapy is the potential benefit in patients with demonstrable HER2 positivity within a predominantly HER2-negative tumour. The decision for therapy requires a yes/no answer, but HER2 status derives from a continuum of gene copy number and protein expression. The diagnostic threshold is made more complex by heterogeneity of the HER2 status within a tumour. This review focuses on available data for HER2-positive pT1N0M0 disease and explores the significance of intratumoural HER2 heterogeneity.
  Endocrine-responsive tumors that are small and without nodal involvement (i.e. tumors classified as pT1 pN0) are a heterogeneous group of tumors that are associated with a low risk of relapse in the majority of the cases. Therefore, the costs and benefits of adjuvant endocrine therapy should be carefully considered within this subgroup of patients. Treatment decisions should take into consideration co-morbidities as well as the presence of other classical risk factors such as HER2 overexpression or extensive peritumoral vascular invasion. Tamoxifen or tamoxifen plus ovarian function suppression should be considered as proper endocrine therapies in premenopausal patients. Ovarian function suppression alone or ovarian ablation might also be considered adequate in selected patients (e.g. very low-risk patients, in the presence of co-morbidities or patient preference). An aromatase inhibitor should form part of standard endocrine therapy for most postmenopausal women with receptor-positive breast cancer, although patients at low risk or with co-morbid musculoskeletal or cardiovascular risk factors may be considered suitable for tamoxifen alone. Tailored endocrine treatments should be considered in patients with endocrine-responsive tumors classified as pT1 pN0. Issues focusing on safety, quality of life and subjective side effects should be routinely discussed.
  Breast cancer is a complex disease and even at a favourable stage, such as the pT1N0 one, it is unlikely to be understood and cured by focusing only on single gene or protein alterations determined with suboptimal technologies, as the standard clinico-pathological predictors are. Improving breast cancer treatment will require a more systematic, structured and multidimensional approach able to integrate tumour biology, disease burden and host-related factors. In this scenario, multigene predictors capturing gene-expression profiling or other molecular measurements have great potential for improving breast cancer management. Nevertheless, even if the gene signatures generated so far clearly represent a step forward in the prediction of patient outcome, they are still showing some limitations that nowadays are the basis for the development of a second generation of multigene predictors. Their strength will stand in the investigation of the tumour-surrounding stroma and tumour microenvironment, in the interrogation of different molecular subtypes of breast cancer as distinct entities and in the ability to predict both early and late relapse. It is prospected that the greater accuracy of this new wave of predictors will provide substantial support to the existing decision tools and will significantly ameliorate our current ability to define breast cancer prognosis.
  BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is less common in China than in the United States and perinatal characteristics predict breast cancer risk in the offspring. We determined levels of pregnancy hormones in Boston and Shanghai to identify those possibly involved in the intrauterine origin of breast cancer. Participants and methods: We compared maternal and cord blood levels of estradiol, estriol, testosterone, progesterone, prolactin, insulin-like growth factors (IGF) 1 and 2, insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 3, adiponectin and sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) in 241 Caucasian and 295 Chinese women. Results: In both centers, hormone levels at the 16th were predictive of those at the 27th gestational week, but there was little correlation between maternal and cord blood levels. In cord blood, we found significantly (P < 0.01) higher levels of estradiol (44.2%), testosterone (54.5%), IGF-2 (22.7%) and strikingly SHBG (104.6%) in Shanghai women, whereas the opposite was true for IGF-1 (-36.8%). Conclusions: Taking into account the current understanding of the plausible biological role of the examined endocrine factors, those likely to be involved in the intrauterine origin of breast cancer are SHBG and IGF-2, with higher cord blood levels among Chinese, and IGF-1, with higher cord blood levels among Caucasian women.
  Tocotrienols are vitamin E members with potent antiproliferative activity against preneoplastic and neoplastic mammary epithelial cells with little or no effect on normal cell growth or functions. However, physicochemical and pharmacokinetic properties greatly limit their use as therapeutic agents. Tocotrienols' chemical instability, poor water solubility, NPC1L1-mediated transport, and rapid metabolism are examples of such obstacles which hinder the therapeutic use of these valuable natural products. Vitamin E esters like α-tocopheryl succinate were prepared to significantly improve chemical and metabolic stability, water solubility, and potency. Thus, 12 semisynthetic tocotrienol ester analogues 4-15 were prepared by direct esterification of natural tocotrienol isomers with various acid anhydrides or chlorides. Esters 4-15 were evaluated for their ability to inhibit the proliferation and migration of the mammary tumor cells +SA and MDA-MB-231, respectively. Esters 5, 9, and 11 effectively inhibited the proliferation of the highly metastatic +SA rodent mammary epithelial cells with IC(50) values of 0.62, 0.51, and 0.86μM, respectively, at doses that had no effect on immortalized normal mouse CL-S1 mammary epithelial cells. Esters 4, 6, 8-10, and 13 inhibited 50% of the migration of the human metastatic MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells at a single 5μM dose in wound-healing assay. The most active ester 9 was 1000-fold more water-soluble and chemically stable versus its parent α-tocotrienol (1). These findings strongly suggest that redox-silent tocotrienol esters may provide superior therapeutic forms of tocotrienols for the control of metastatic breast cancer.
  INTRODUCTION: We investigated survival in breast cancer patients by age group, focussing on those covered by screening programmes, using data from 12 European population-based cancer registries participating in the European Network for Indicators on Cancer Survival Working Group. METHODS: We calculated period estimates of 5-year relative survival for 2000-2004 and examined the change in survival estimates for four age groups between 1990-1994 and 2000-2004. Trends in age specific incidence, survival and mortality were additionally compared to those in the United States based on results from the Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) programme. RESULTS: Breast cancer survival uniformly increased particularly in areas with lower breast cancer survival for patients diagnosed in 1990-1994. With the exception of Geneva, Scotland and Estonia, the rise in survival was always larger among the younger age groups than in the 70+ age group and the age-gradient widened over time. The 5-year relative survival of patients aged 70 and above in the European registries was at least 7 percentage points lower than the 5-year relative survival of patients in the same age group in the US in 2000-2004. During the study period, incidence increased in all age groups and populations with a few exceptions, an observation paralleled by declining mortality. CONCLUSIONS: Results showed that some of the geographical differences in overall survival are even larger when considering age groups, in particular between Western and Eastern European countries. Furthermore, some of the differences in survival within the Northern and Western European areas could be due to variations in the implementation of screening programmes rather than economic inequalities.
  Grifolin, a secondary metabolite isolated from the fresh fruiting bodies of the mushroom Albatrellus confluens, has been shown to inhibit the growth of some cancer cell lines in vitro by induction of apoptosis in previous studies of our group. However, the mechanisms of action are not completely understood. An apoptosis-related gene expression profiling analysis provided a clue that death-associated protein kinase 1 (dapk1) gene was upregulated at least twofold in response to grifolin treatment in nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell CNE1. Here, we further investigated the role of DAPK1 in apoptotic effect induced by grifolin. We observed that protein as well as mRNA level of DAPK1 was induced by grifolin in a dose-dependent manner in nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell CNE1. We found that grifolin increased both Ser392 and Ser20 phosphorylation levels of transcription factor p53 protein, which could promote its transcriptional activity. Moreover, induced by grifolin, the recruitment of p53 to dapk1 gene promoter was confirmed to enhance markedly using EMSA and ChIP assays analysis. The involvement of DAPK1 in grifolin-induced apoptosis was supported by the studies that introducing siRNA targeting DAPK1 to CNE1 cells remarkably interfered grifolin-caused apoptotic effect as well as the activation of caspase-3. Grifolin induced upregulation of DAPK1 via p53 was also observed in tumour cells derived from human breast cancer and human colon cancer. The findings suggest that upregulation of DAPK1 via p53-DAPK1 pathway is an important mechanism of grifolin contributing to its ability to induce apoptotic effect. Since growing evidence found a significant loss of DAPK1 expression in a large variety of tumour types, grifolin may represent a promising candidate in the intervention of cancer via targeting DAPK1.
  BACKGROUND: Due to the rising trend of delaying pregnancy to later in life, more women are diagnosed with breast cancer before completing their families. Therefore, enquiry into the feasibility and safety of pregnancy following breast cancer diagnosis is on the rise. Available evidence suggests that women with a history of breast cancer are frequently advised against future conception for fear that pregnancy could adversely affect their breast cancer outcome. Hence, we conducted a meta-analysis to understand the effect of pregnancy on overall survival of women with a history of breast cancer. METHODS: Two of the authors independently performed a literature search up to September 2009 with no language restrictions. Eligible studies were published retrospective control-matched, population-based and hospital-based studies that have addressed the impact of pregnancy on the overall survival of women with history of breast cancer. Pooling of data was done using the random effect model. Unpublished statistics from three studies were obtained to perform further subgroup and sensitivity analyses. This included examining the effect of pregnancy according to age at diagnosis, healthy mother effect, type of study, nodal status and other parameters. RESULTS: Fourteen studies were included in this meta-analysis (1244 cases and 18,145 controls). Women who got pregnant following breast cancer diagnosis had a 41% reduced risk of death compared to women who did not get pregnant [PRR: 0.59 (90% confidence interval (CI): 0.50-0.70)]. This difference was seen irrespective of the type of the study and particularly in women with history of node-negative disease. In a subgroup analysis, we compared the outcome of women with history of breast cancer who became pregnant to breast cancer patients who did not get pregnant and were known to be free of relapse. In this analysis, we did not find significant differences in survival between either group [PRR: 0.85; 95% CI: 0.53-1.35]. CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms that pregnancy in women with history of breast cancer is safe and does not compromise their overall survival. Hence, breast cancer survivors should not be denied the opportunity of future conception.
  BACKGROUND: Depression and anxiety are common after diagnosis of breast cancer. We examined to what extent these are recurrences of previous disorder and, controlling for this, whether shame, self-blame and low social support after diagnosis predicted onset of depression and anxiety subsequently.MethodWomen with primary breast cancer who had been treated surgically self-reported shame, self-blame, social support and emotional distress post-operatively. Psychiatric interview 12 months later identified those with adult lifetime episodes of major depression (MD) or generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) before diagnosis and onset over the subsequent year. Statistical analysis examined predictors of each disorder in that year. RESULTS: Of the patients, two-thirds with episodes of MD and 40% with episodes of GAD during the year after diagnosis were experiencing recurrence of previous disorder. Although low social support, self-blame and shame were each associated with both MD and GAD after diagnosis, they did not mediate the relationship of disorder after diagnosis with previous disorder. Low social support, but not shame or self-blame, predicted recurrence after controlling for previous disorder. CONCLUSIONS: Anxiety and depression during the first year after diagnosis of breast cancer are often the recurrence of previous disorder. In predicting disorder following diagnosis, self-blame and shame are merely markers of previous disorder. Low social support is an independent predictor and therefore may have a causal role.
  BACKGROUND: Here we present the first paired-end sequencing of tumors from genetically engineered mouse models of cancer to determine how faithfully these models recapitulate the landscape of somatic rearrangements found in human tumors. These were models of Trp53-mutated breast cancer, Brca1- and Brca2-associated hereditary breast cancer, and E-cadherin (Cdh1) mutated lobular breast cancer. RESULTS: We show that although Brca1- and Brca2-deficient mouse mammary tumors have a defect in the homologous recombination pathway there is no apparent difference in the type or frequency of somatic rearrangements found in these cancers when compared to other mouse mammary cancers, and tumors from all genetic backgrounds showed evidence of micro-homology mediated repair and non-homologous end-joining processes. Importantly mouse mammary tumors were found to carry fewer structural rearrangements than human mammary cancers and expressed in-frame fusion genes. Like the fusion genes found in human mammary tumors these were not recurrent. One mouse tumor was found to contain an internal deletion of exons of the Lrp1b gene, which lead to a smaller in-frame transcript. We found internal in-frame deletions in the human ortholog of this gene in a significant number (4.2%) of human cancer cell lines. CONCLUSIONS: Paired-end sequencing of mouse mammary tumors revealed that they display significant heterogeneity in their profiles of somatic rearrangement, but importantly fewer rearrangements than cognate human mammary tumors, probably because these cancers have been induced by strong driver mutations engineered into the mouse genome. Both human and mouse mammary cancers carry expressed fusion genes and conserved homozygous deletions.
  The T-box transcription factor, TBX3, provides an important link between embryonic development and cancer. TBX3 mediates limb, mammary gland and heart development and in humans, mutations resulting in haploinsufficiency of TBX3 lead to the ulnar-mammary syndrome. Importantly, the de-regulation of TBX3 gene expression has been linked to several cancers where it acts to suppress senescence, and promotes proliferation and tumour invasion. Despite the negative impact of de-regulated TBX3 expression as seen by developmental defects and cancer, surprisingly little is known about the regulation of the TBX3 gene. Here we show that the phorbol ester 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) induces TBX3 protein and mRNA levels in a PKC-dependent manner via the activator protein 1 (AP-1) transcription factors c-Jun and JunB. Furthermore, these AP-1 factors are shown to mediate the activation of the TBX3 gene by binding a non-consensus TPA-response element in the TBX3 promoter in vitro and in vivo. We also demonstrate that TBX3 contributes to the TPA-induced migration previously observed for the MCF-7 breast epithelium cancer cell line. Our data reveal a previously unidentified pathway that upregulates TBX3 expression and provides additional evidence that increased levels of TBX3 contributes to metastasis.
  Background: Supplemental screening ultrasonography (US) in addition to mammography can help detect early breast cancers in women with dense breasts and other risk factors. It is crucial to understand the imaging features of US-detected cancer to identify them in screening population. Purpose: To retrospectively evaluate the US features and final assessments of breast cancers detected by supplemental screening US in comparison with cancers seen on screening mammography. Material and Methods: The study included 80 women (mean age 46 years, range 31&#x2013;65 years) with 80 breast cancers detected by supplemental screening US. Another 80 women (mean age 52 years, range 33&#x2013;77 years) with 80 breast cancers seen on screening mammography were included for a control group. US features and final assessments were classified according to the Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS) without knowledge of the method of detection, or mammographic or histologic findings. Results of the two groups were compared. Results: Breast cancers detected by supplemental screening US were more frequently found to have the following features: an oval shape (21% [17/80] vs 10% [8/80], P = 0.013), a circumscribed margin (13% [10/80] vs 4% [3/80], P = 0.043), an abrupt interface (79% [63/80] vs 53% [42/80], P &lt; 0.001), and no posterior acoustic (70% [56/80] vs 53% [42/80], P = 0.023) or surrounding tissue (79% [63/80] vs 28% [22/80], P &lt; 0.001) changes. For the final assessment, 93% (74/80) of US-detected cancers and 60% (48/80) of cancers seen on mammography were classified as a category 4, while 3% (2/80) of US-detected cancers and 38% (30/80) of cancers seen on mammography were category 5. Conclusion: Compared with breast cancers seen on screening mammography, breast cancers detected by supplemental screening US tend to have less malignant US features, although most (95%) of them were classified as category 4 or 5.
  Background: Studies comparing analog and digital mammography in breast cancer screening have shown conflicting results. Little is known about the use of digital photon-counting detectors. Purpose: To retrospectively compare performance indicators in screen-film (SFM) and full-field digital mammography (FFDM) using a photon-counting detector in a population-based screening program. Material and Methods: The Norwegian Social Science Data Services approved the study, which was part of the Norwegian Breast Cancer Screening Program. The program invites women aged 50&#x2013;69 years to two-view mammography biannually. The study period was January 2005 to June 2006 for SFM and August 2006 to December 2007 for FFDM. Independent double reading was performed using a five-point rating scale for probability of cancer. Recalls due to abnormal mammography were retrospectively reviewed by an expert panel. Performance indicators for the two techniques were compared. Attendance rate was 83.6% (7442/8901) for SFM and 82.0% (6932/8451) for FFDM. Results: The recall rate due to abnormal mammography, cancer detection rate and positive predictive value did not differ significantly between SFM and FFDM: recall 2.3% (174/7442) versus 2.4% (168/6932), cancer detection 0.39% (29/7442) versus 0.48% (33/6932), positive predictive value 16.7% (29/174) versus 19.6% (33/168), respectively (P&gt;0.05 for all). The recall rate due to technically inadequate mammograms was 0.3% (19/7442) for SFM and 0.01% (1/6932) for FFDM. In the retrospective review, a significantly higher proportion of calcifications and asymmetric density were categorized as normal or definitively benign in FFDM compared with SFM. The average glandular dose was 2.17 mGy for SFM and 1.25 mGy for FFDM. Conclusion: Performance indicators show that FFDM using photon-counting detector is suitable for breast cancer screening. The lower radiation dose and lower recalls due to technically inadequate mammograms are of importance in mammography screening.
  Polypurine Reverse-Hoogsteen hairpins, PPRHs, are dsDNA molecules formed by two polypurine stretches linked by a pentathymidine loop, with intramolecular Reverse-Hoogsteen bonds that allow a hairpin structure. PPRHs bind to polypyrimidine targets by Watson-Crick bonds maintaining simultaneously a hairpin structure due to intramolecular Hoogsteen bonds. Previously, we described the ability of Template-PPRHs to decrease mRNA levels since these PPRHs target the template DNA strand interfering with the transcription process. Now, we designed Coding-PPRHs, a new type of PPRHs that directly target the pre-mRNA. The dihydrofolate reductase gene, dhfr, was selected as a target in breast cancer therapy. These PPRHs caused a high degree of cytotoxicity and a decrease in DHFR mRNA and protein levels, but by a different mechanism of action than Template-PPRH. Coding-PPRHs interfere with the splicing process by competing with U2AF65 for binding to the polypyrimidine target sequence, leading to a lower amount of mature mRNA. These new PPRHs showed high specificity as no off-target effects were found. The application of these molecules as therapeutic tools was tested in breast cancer cells resistant to methotrexate obtaining a noticeable cytotoxicity even though the dhfr locus was amplified. Coding-PPRHs can be considered as new molecules to decrease gene expression at the mRNA level, and an alternative to other antisense molecules.
  Multi-drug resistant (MDR) cancer is a significant clinical obstacle and is often implicated in cases of recurrent, non-responsive disease. Targeted nanoparticles were made by synthesizing a poly(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide)/poly(ethylene glycol)/epidermal growth factor receptor targeting peptide (PLGA/PEG/EGFR-peptide) construct for incorporation in poly(epsilon-caprolactone) (PCL) nanoparticles. MDR was induced in a panel of nine human breast and ovarian cancer cell lines using hypoxia. EGFR-targeted polymer blend nanoparticles were shown to actively target EGFR over-expressing cell lines, especially upon induction of hypoxia. The nanoparticles were capable of sustained drug release. Combination therapy with lonidamine and paclitaxel significantly improved the therapeutic index of both drugs. Treatment with a nanoparticle dose of 1 µM paclitaxel/10 µM lonidamine resulted in less than 10% cell viability for all hypoxic/MDR cell lines and less than 5% cell viability for all normoxic cell lines. Comparatively, treatment with 1 µM paclitaxel alone was the approximate IC50 value of the MDR cells while treatment with lonidamine alone had very little effect. PLGA/PEG/EGFR-peptide delivery system actively targets a MDR cell by exploiting the expression of EGFR. This system treats MDR by inhibiting the Warburg effect and promoting mitochondrial binding of pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 proteins (lonidamine), while hyperstabilizing microtubules (paclitaxel). This nanocarrier system actively targets a MDR associated phenotype (EGFR receptor over-expression), further enhancing the therapeutic index of both drugs and potentiating the use of lonidamine/paclitaxel combination therapy in the treatment of MDR cancer.
  People with schizophrenia are more likely to die prematurely than the general population from both suicide and physical ill health. Published studies examining the incidence of cancer in schizophrenia patients report increased, reduced or similar incidence compared with the general population. Older studies tended to report lower incidence rates which fuelled speculation as to the biological and other mechanisms for this protective effect. Furthermore, mortality rates in patients with schizophrenia appear higher than expected. We undertook a non-systematic review of published data to give an overview for these variable findings and illustrate methodological confounders by highlighting a systematic review of breast cancer studies.
  BACKGROUND: The rise in Internet use for seeking health information raises questions about the role the Internet may play in how patients make medical decisions. OBJECTIVE: To examine Internet use and perceived importance of different sources of information by patients making 9 specific medical decisions covering prescription medication initiation, cancer screening, and elective surgery. SETTING: National sample of US adults identified by random-digit dialing. DESIGN: Cross-sectional survey conducted between November 2006 and May 2007. PARTICIPANTS: The final sample comprised 2575 English-speaking US adults aged 40 y and older who had either undergone 1 of 9 medical procedures or tests or talked with a health care provider about doing so during the previous 2 y. MEASUREMENTS: Participants indicated if they or other family members used the Internet to seek information related to each of the specific medical decisions and rated how important the health care provider, the Internet (if used), family and friends, and the media (newspapers, magazines, and television) were in providing information to help make the medical decision. RESULTS: Use of the Internet for information related to specific decisions among adults 40 y and older was generally low (28%) but varied across decisions, from 17% for breast cancer screening to 48% for hip/knee replacement. Internet use was higher at younger ages, rising from 14% among those aged 70 y and older to 38% for those aged 40 to 49 y. Internet users consistently rated health care providers as the most influential source of information for medical decisions, followed by the Internet, family and friends, and media. LIMITATIONS: Telephone surveys are limited by coverage and nonresponse. The authors excluded health-related Internet use not associated with the 9 target decisions. CONCLUSIONS: A minority of patients reported using the Internet to make specific common medical decisions, but use varied widely by type of decision. Perhaps reflecting perceived risk and uncertainty, use was lowest for screening decisions and highest for surgical decisions.
  BACKGROUND: Health behavior theories suggest that high perceived risk for cancer will be associated with screening, but few studies have examined how perceived risk relates to the screening decision process. OBJECTIVE: To examine relationships between perceived risk of cancer and behaviors during decision making for 3 screening tests. DESIGN: Cross-sectional survey conducted between November 2006 and May 2007. SETTING: Nationwide random-digit dial telephone survey. PARTICIPANTS: A total of 1729 English-speaking US adults aged 40 y and older who reported making a cancer screening decision (about breast, colon, or prostate tests) in the previous 2 y. MEASUREMENTS: Participants completed measures of perceived risk, information seeking, and shared decision-making tendencies. RESULTS: As perceived risk for cancer increased, patients were more likely to seek information about screening on their own (e.g., 35% of participants who perceived a high risk of cancer searched the Internet compared with 18% for those who perceived a low risk, P < 0.001) and in interactions with their physicians. As perceived risk increased, patients were also more likely to consult with more than 1 provider. Gender moderated the shared decision-making preference such that men with high perceived risks were more likely than women with high perceived risks to report they would have preferred more involvement in the decision (35% v. 9%, P = 0.001). LIMITATIONS: Cross-sectional data limit causal inferences. CONCLUSIONS: Higher perceived risk was associated with greater patient participation, as shown by more information seeking and greater desire for decisional involvement (moderated by gender). The results suggest that perceived risk of cancer could influence patient behavior when deciding about screening.
  BACKGROUND: Although many researchers have examined patient involvement and patient-provider interactions within specific clinical environments, no nationally representative data exist to characterize patient perceptions of decision making and patient-provider communications across multiple common medical decisions. OBJECTIVE: To identify deficits and variations in the patient experience of making common medical decisions about initiation of prescription medications for hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, or depression; screening tests for colorectal, breast, or prostate cancer; and surgeries for knee or hip replacement, cataracts, or lower back pain, as well as to identify factors associated with patient confidence in the decisions. SETTING: National sample of US adults identified by random-digit dialing. DESIGN: Cross-sectional survey conducted from November 2006 to May 2007. PARTICIPANTS: Included 2473 English-speaking adults age 40 and older who reported undertaking 1 or more of the above 9 medical actions or discussing doing so with a health care provider within the past 2 years. MEASUREMENTS: Patients reported who initiated discussions and made the final decisions, how much discussion of pros and cons occurred, whether they were asked about their preferences, and their confidence that the decision "was the right one." RESULTS: The proportion of patient-driven decisions varied significantly across decisions (range: blood pressure: 16% to knee/hip replacement: 48%). Most patients (78%-85%) reported that providers made a recommendation, and such recommendations generally favored taking medical action. Fewer patients reported that providers asked them about their preferences (range: colon cancer screening: 34% to knee/hip replacement: 80%) or discussed reasons not to take action (range: breast cancer screening: 20% to lower back surgery: 80%). Decision confidence was higher among patients who reported primarily making the decision themselves (odds ratio [OR] = 14.6, P < 0.001) or having been asked for their preference (OR = 1.32, P < 0.01) and was lower among patients whose patient-provider discussions included cons (OR = 0.74, P = 0.008). LIMITATIONS: Recall biases may affect patients' memories of their decision-making processes. CONCLUSIONS: DECISIONS participants reported wide variations in the proportion of discussions that included a conversation about reasons not to take action or a conversation about patients' preferences about what they would like to do. These factors appear directly related to patients' confidence that the decision was "right."
  BACKGROUND: Patients should understand the risks and benefits of cancer screening in order to make informed screening decisions. OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the extent of informed decision making in patient-provider discussions for colorectal (CRC), breast (BrCa), and prostate (PCa) cancer screening. SETTING: National sample of US adults identified by random-digit dialing. DESIGN: Cross-sectional survey conducted between November 2006 and May 2007. PARTICIPANTS: English-speaking US adults aged 50 y and older who had discussed cancer screening with a health care provider within the previous 2 y. MEASUREMENTS: Cancer screening survey modules that asked about demographic characteristics, cancer knowledge, the importance of various sources of information, and self-reported cancer screening decision-making processes. RESULTS: Overall, 1082 participants completed 1 or more of the 3 cancer modules. Although participants generally considered themselves well informed about screening tests, half or more could not correctly answer even 1 open-ended knowledge question for any given module. Participants consistently overestimated risks for being diagnosed with and dying from each cancer and overestimated the positive predictive values of prostate-specific antigen tests and mammography. Providers were the most highly rated information source, usually initiated screening discussions (64%-84%), and often recommended screening (73%-90%). However, participants reported that providers elicited their screening preferences in only 31% (CRC women) to 57% (PCa) of discussions. Although more than 90% of the discussions addressed the pros of screening, only 19% (BrCa) to 30% (PCa) addressed the cons of screening. LIMITATIONS: Recall bias is possible because screening process reports were not independently validated. CONCLUSIONS: Cancer screening decisions reported by patients who discussed screening with their health care providers consistently failed to meet criteria for being informed. Given the high ratings for provider information and frequent recommendations for screening, providers have important opportunities to ensure that informed decision making occurs for cancer screening decisions.
  BACKGROUND: To make informed decisions, patients must have adequate knowledge of key decision-relevant facts. OBJECTIVE: To determine adults' knowledge about information relevant to common types of medication, screening, or surgery decisions they recently made. SETTING: National sample of US adults identified by random-digit dialing. DESIGN: Cross-sectional survey conducted between November 2006 and May 2007. PARTICIPANTS: A total of 2575 English-speaking adults aged 40 y or older who reported having discussed the following medical decisions with a health care provider within the previous 2 y: prescription medications for hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, or depression; screening tests for colorectal, breast, or prostate cancer; or surgeries for knee/hip replacement, cataracts, or lower back pain. MEASUREMENTS: Participants answered knowledge questions and rated the importance of their health care provider, family/friends, and the media as sources of information. RESULTS: Accuracy rates varied widely across questions and decision contexts. For example, patients considering cataract surgery were more likely to correctly estimate recovery time than those patients considering lower back pain or knee/hip replacement (78% v. 29% and 39%, P < 0.001). Similarly, participants were more knowledgeable of facts about colorectal cancer screening than those who were asked about breast or prostate cancer. Finally, respondents were consistently more knowledgeable on comparable questions about blood pressure medication than cholesterol medication or antidepressants. The impact of demographic characteristics and sources of information also varied substantially. For example, blacks had lower knowledge than whites about cancer screening decisions (odds ratio [OR] = 0.57; 95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.43, 0.75; P = 0.001) and medication (OR = 0.77; 95% CI = 0.60, 0.97; P = 0.03) even after we controlled for other demographic factors. The same was not true for surgical decisions. LIMITATIONS: The questions did not measure all knowledge relevant to informed decision making, were subject to recall biases, and may have assessed numeracy more than knowledge. CONCLUSIONS: Patient knowledge of key facts relevant to recently made medical decisions is often poor and varies systematically by decision type and patient characteristics. Improving patient knowledge about risks, benefits, and characteristics of medical procedures is essential to support informed decision making.
  BACKGROUND: Patient involvement is required before patients' preferences can be reflected in the medical care they receive. Furthermore, patients are a vital link between physicians' assessments of patients' needs and actual implementation of appropriate care. Yet no study has specifically examined how and when a representative sample of patients considered, discussed, and made medical decisions. OBJECTIVE: To identify decision prevalence and decision-making processes regarding 1) initiation of prescription medications for hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, or depression; 2) screening tests for colorectal, breast, or prostate cancer; and 3) surgeries for knee or hip replacement, cataracts, or lower back pain. DESIGN: Computer-assisted telephone interview survey. SETTING: Nationally representative sample of US adults in households with telephones. PARTICIPANTS: 3010 English-speaking adults age 40 and older identified using a stratified random sample of telephone numbers. MEASUREMENTS: Estimated prevalence of medical decisions, defined as the patient having initiated medications, been screened, or had surgery within the past 2 years or having discussed these actions with a health care provider during the same interval, as well as decision-specific data regarding patient knowledge, attitudes and patient-provider interactions. RESULTS: 82.2% of the target population reported making at least 1 medical decision in the preceding 2 years. The proportion of decisions resulting in patient action varied dramatically both across decision type (medications [61%] v. screening [83%] v. surgery [44%]; P < 0.001), and within each category (e.g., blood pressure medications [76%] v. cholesterol medications [55%] vs. depression medications [48%]; P < 0.001). Respondents reported making more decisions if they had a primary care provider or poorer health status and fewer decisions if they had lower education, were male, or were under age 50. Limitations. Retrospective self-reports may incorporate recall biases. CONCLUSIONS: Medical decisions with significant life-saving, quality of life, and cost implications are a pervasive part of life for most US adults. The DECISIONS dataset provides a rich research environment for exploring factors influencing when and how patients make common medical decisions.
  Purpose: To evaluate the levels of asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA), an endothelin and nitric oxide (NO) synthase inhibitor, in patients with node-positive breast cancer who had undergone surgery and in a control group including healthy individuals. The effects of taxane-based chemotherapy on endothelin-1 (ET-1) and ADMA levels in the patient group were also studied. Methods: Body mass index (BMI), serum lipids (total cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol and triglycerides), ADMA and ET-1 were studied in 19 healthy individuals and in 19 patients with stage II and III, lymph node-positive breast cancer receiving taxane-based chemotherapy. Results: ET-1 (34.3±12.8 vs. 13.8±4.5 pg/mL; p<0.001) and ADMA (0.87±0.18 vs. 0.68±0.24 μmol/L; p=0.024) levels were significantly higher in the breast cancer group compared to the control group. A significant reduction was noted in ET-1 (34.3±12.8 vs. 27.3±4.3 pg/mL; p=0.021) and ADMA (0.87±0.18 vs. 0.73±0.15 μmol/L; p=0.014) levels in patients following 6 cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy to baseline values. Conclusion: The present study demonstrated significantly higher levels of ET-1 and ADMA in the breast cancer group compared to the control group, which were reduced significantly with adjuvant taxane-based chemotherapy. It is apparent that prospective studies are needed to understand the effect of reducing ET-1 and ADMA levels on patient survival. We believe that the present study will provide guidance to relevant future studies.
  Purpose: To evaluate the necessity and direct cost effectiveness of screening and staging procedures in breast cancer patients having ≥4 positive axillary lymph nodes and to identify further possible biopathological risk factors associated with increased risk of metastasis. Methods: We reviewed the demographic and clinicopathological data from the medical records of 1897 newly diagnosed breast cancer patients. Patients having ≥4 positive axillary lymph nodes after primary surgery for breast cancer and who had staging examinations for metastasis were eligible. The impact of staging procedures (thoracoabdominal CT, bone scan etc.) for detecting metastasis, decision of adjuvant treatment and direct costs were analyzed in 329 patients with operable breast cancer. Results: Thirty-five (10.6%) patients were found with metastasis at diagnosis. Seven (20.0%) among them had multiple metastases. Eighteen (51.4%) had lung, 17 (48.6%) bone, and 7 (20.0%) liver metastasis. Twenty-one (60.0%) patients needed further radiological investigation for metastasis confirmation. Treatment decision was changed in 27 (77.1%) patients. No statistically significant risk factor was identified among the metastatic patients by means of conventional demographic and biopathological parameters. The cost of screening was lower when compared to the cost of treatment without any screening procedure. Conclusion: Since the conventional clinicopathological data seems not sufficient to define the risk of developing metastasis in breast cancer patients with ≥4 axillary lymph node involvement, all of them should undergo full staging examinations until new parameters based on genomic level are defined. Staging procedures need modification for high risk breast cancer patients.
  Purpose: To compare ultrasonographic (US) with computerized tomographic (CT) images in order to choose electron energy for radiotherapy (RT) boost field in patients with breast conserving surgery (BCS). Methods: Thirty-seven consecutive patients with breast cancer treated by BCS and RT in our department were evaluated. Median age was 49 years (range 32-82). According to the Dokuz Eylul Breast Tumor Group Protocol (DEBTG), in patients with BCS, RT (5000 cGy to the whole breast ± lymphatic area) and boost with electron energy to the primary tumor bed (1000 cGy if surgical margin negative, or 1600 cGy if surgical margin positive was delivered. Before January 2003, the distances between skin-the deepest point of tumor bed (STD), skin-clips (SCD), and skin-fascia (SFD) were measured with US to choose electron energy in boost field. Since then, CT simulation images were used to this purpose. These two imaging systems were compared in this study. Electron energy was selected after measurement of the deepest metallic clips in CT simulation images (90%) or measurement of the STD if no clips were present (10%). Results: Median measurements with US and CT were as follows: STD: US 12 mm (range 4-35), CT 28 mm (range 2-54); SFD: US 25 mm (range 6-57), CT 31 mm (range 2-93); SCD: US 14 mm (range 7-26), CT 29 mm (range 2-68). The median electron energy was 9 MeV é (range 6-12) for US and 12 MeV é (range 6-21) for CT. Concordance in US and CT measurements was 27%. Conclusion: This preliminary study reveals that CT-based SCD measurements are deeper than US measurements, and selected electron energy with CT is 3 MeV higher than US. These two factors can affect local control and side effects. We noticed only one local recurrence in 37 patients. We did not evaluate side effects in this study. These could be a subject of a future study.
  Certain lifestyle and environmental factors play an important role on breast cancer (BC) risk, but data on the influence of nutritional factors are still conflicting. Migrational data have pointed to nutrition as one of the more relevant external factors involved. So far, the only well established nutrition-related risk factors for BC are obesity and alcohol consumption. The evidence that body fatness is a cause of postmenopausal breast cancer is convincing as is the evidence that alcoholic drinks are a cause of BC in all ages. On the other hand, body fatness probably protects against BC diagnosed premenopause. It is more likely that the BC risk is related to life-long dietary habits. The general preventive recommendation often includes a reduction of alcohol, red meat and total dietary fat, and increase in vegetable and fruit consumption. The purpose of this work was to summarize and present current opinions on the influence of diet and nutrition on BC etiology and to suggest possible preventive measures.
  In this review we will provide a synopsis of the biological markers used in the care of breast cancer patients with emphasis on clinical application. The advent of molecular technology has incorporated new biomarkers along with the older immunohistochemical and serum ones. Serum tumor markers are proteins shed from breast cancer cells. Their levels have long been used as a measure of tumor burden and disease progression or recurrence. However, limitations exist that should be known to those involved in breast cancer management. Historically, immunohistochemical markers have been used to guide treatment decisions. These markers reveal characteristics of the cancer cells and have been used both as prognostic and predictive factors. Molecular markers give information on the expression of certain genes in tumor tissues related to proliferation, invasion, and metastasis and researchers try to correlate them with the use of mathematical modeling with clinical outcomes, hence those markers exhibit prognostic and predictive significance. All these tools can guide personalized treatment by estimating patient prognosis and risk of relapse and tailor accordingly therapeutic approaches.
  There is now convincing evidence of an increased risk of patients with obesity or type 2 diabetes developing cancer. To understand the possible causation, type 2 diabetic muscle lysine to arginine (MKR) mice were studied. Introduction of mammary tumour cell lines resulted in aggressive growth of the mammary tumours in the hyperinsulinaemic MKR female mice. Blocking the insulin receptor activation or reducing the hyperinsulinaemia reduced the mammary tumour burden. Thus, hyperinsulinaemia may be one of the factors in the increased breast cancer risk seen with obesity and type 2 diabetes. Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
  Objective: Recent reports suggest that Black breast cancer patients receive adjuvant therapies less often than their White counterparts; however, few studies have examined the self-reported experiences of Black breast cancer patients making treatment decisions. This study examined cultural beliefs and healthcare factors that impacted Black women's treatment decisions.Methods: In-depth interviews were conducted with 49 Black women with early stage breast cancer (stages 0-III). Participants resided in Washington, DC (n = 13), and Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (n = 36). Women's ages ranged from 26 to 85 (m = 53.9). All interviews were transcribed verbatim and then entered into a qualitative software program. Three coders independently read and coded transcripts using this software.Results: The data did not reveal common cultural themes that influenced women's treatment decisions. Spiritual beliefs were important to all participants and did seem to help them cope with and reframe their illness experiences. The patient-provider relationship was the most notable factor that influenced treatment decisions. While most women reported that they were satisfied with their provider relationships, their narratives revealed that many lacked knowledge about their diagnoses and treatment regimens. Those patients who demonstrated a better understanding of their disease and treatments also seemed to adhere to recommendations for adjuvant therapy.Conclusions: Poor communication may impact treatment decision-making and, ultimately, outcomes. Important next steps will include quantifying Black women's patient-provider interactions and examining how these factors influence adherence behaviors. Ensuring that patients understand their diagnosis and treatment options will also be important for clinical practice. Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
  PURPOSE: The survival of patients with liver metastases from solid tumors is poor. We conducted a phase I study of hepatic arterial infusion (HAI) paclitaxel in patients with advanced cancer and predominant liver involvement. METHODS: Patients were treated with HAI paclitaxel 150-275 mg/m(2) (and 15,000 IU heparin intraarterially) every 28 days. A "3 + 3" study design was used. RESULTS: Twenty-six patients were treated (median age, 59 years). Diagnoses were colorectal cancer (n = 10), breast cancer (n = 7), and other (n = 9). The median number of prior therapies was four (range, 0-10). The maximum tolerated dose (MTD) was HAI paclitaxel 225 mg/m(2). Dose-limiting toxicities (DLTs) included Grade 3 neuropathy (1 of 5 patients) at HAI paclitaxel 275 mg/m(2) and Grade 4 thrombocytopenia and neutropenia, and Grade 3 mucositis (1 of 4 patients) at 250 mg/m(2). None of the eight patients treated with HAI paclitaxel 225 mg/m(2) experienced a DLT. The most common toxicities were nausea and peripheral neuropathy. Of 22 patients evaluable for response, 3 (13.6%) patients had SD for ≥4 months (colorectal cancer, n = 1; thyroid cancer, n = 1; and hepatocellular carcinoma, n = 1; duration of response was 4 months, 7.1 months, and 22.2+ months, respectively). CONCLUSION: The MTD of HAI paclitaxel was 225 mg/m(2). This regimen was well tolerated and had antitumor activity in selected patients.
  mTOR plays a key role in tumor cell cycle control, proliferation, and survival. RAD001 (everolimus) is a novel macrolide that inhibits mTOR and thus downstream signaling pathways. 31 post-menopausal women with early breast cancer were given 5 mg RAD001 once daily for 14 days prior to surgery. Biopsies were taken at diagnosis and at surgery (post 14 days of treatment) and assessed for immunohistochemical changes in proliferation (Ki67), apoptosis (active caspase-3), p-AKT (s473), p-S6 (s235/236 and s240/244), p-mTOR (s2448), ER, and PR. Five patients did not complete the 2-week treatment period due to adverse events. All adverse events were grade 1 or 2 (NCIC-CTC scale). RAD001 treatment significantly decreased proliferation (geometric mean reduction 74% from baseline (p = 0.019)), particularly in HER-2 positive tumors. High Ki67 pre-treatment correlated with reduction in Ki67, an increase in apoptosis, a reduction in p-AKT (cytoplasmic) and reduction in p-mTOR following treatment. Nuclear expression of p-AKT was significantly reduced with treatment. Tumors that had a reduction in Ki67 with treatment exhibited a significant reduction in cytoplasmic p-AKT. p-S6 staining was significantly reduced independently of Ki67 (p < 0.001 for two sites of phosphorylation). RAD001 5 mg/daily is safe and tolerable in postmenopausal early breast cancer patients and inhibits the mTOR pathway and its downstream effectors, significantly reducing tumor cell proliferation. Tumors with high Ki67, high p-AKT, and HER-2 positivity may be more responsive to mTOR inhibition with RAD001. This is the first study to report results of RAD001 5 mg as a single agent in early breast cancer.
  The prognosis of patients with CNS involvement of solid tumors is poor. In these patients, systemic chemotherapy has a theoretical advantage of concurrent treatment of systemic disease and reduced risk of neurotoxicity. Here, we report on the efficacy and toxicity of topotecan/ifosfamide (TOPO/IFO) combination chemotherapy in patients treated for CNS involvement of different solid malignancies. Fourteen patients with CNS manifestations (seven with brain metastases, two meningeal carcinomatosis, and five both) of solid tumors (seven with breast cancer, six lung cancer, and one unknown primary cancer) received TOPO/IFO treatment. Eleven patients each were pretreated with 1-6 systemic therapy regimens and whole-brain irradiation. Patients received a total of 34 (median 2) TOPO/IFO cycles. TOPO dosage was 3.6 mg/m(2) (1.2 mg/m(2), days 1-3) and IFO dosage 3,000 mg/m(2) (1,500 mg/m(2), days 1-2) per cycle. Of 12 patients with brain metastases, one patient had partial remission, three stable disease, two progressed, and six had no radiologic CNS response evaluation. Response of meningeal carcinomatosis was found in two and progressive disease in two (three patients not evaluated). Neurologic improvement or stabilization was observed in six of twelve evaluable patients. No systemic tumor response was seen in seven evaluated patients. Grade 3/4 toxicities in eleven evaluable patients were leukopenia (n = 9), infection (n = 6), and thrombopenia (n = 5). Median time to treatment failure was 43 days and median overall survival 107 days. Symptom control was frequently achieved with TOPO/IFO systemic chemotherapy despite a low objective response rate. The feasibility of this treatment is impaired by severe hematotoxicity.
  The immunophenotypic predictive profile of BRCA1-associated cancers including major predictive markers, i.e., PARP-1, EGFR, c-kit, HER-2, and steroid hormones (ER/PR) that may have therapeutic relevance has not yet been reported in a comprehensive study. Using immunohistochemistry, we examined the expression of these proteins in a large cohort of BRCA1-associated breast cancers. PARP-1 immunoreactivity was found in 81.9%, EGFR in 43.6%, ER/PR in 17.9%, c-kit in 14.7%, and overexpression of HER-2 in 3.6% of cancers. For all markers studied, 8.2% of tumors were negative. Expression of only one predictive marker was found in 29.7% of cancers, and most frequently, it was PARP-1 (20.8%). In 62.1% of tumors, more than one predictive marker was expressed: PARP-1 and EGFR in 30.4%, PARP-1, and hormone receptors in 13.3% and PARP-1 with c-kit in 7.5% of all tumors. Coexpression of two or more other predictive markers was rare. There were significant differences in the median age at diagnosis of BRCA1-associated cancer between patients with ER+ vs. ER- and grades 1-2 vs. grade 3 tumors. These results demonstrate that BRCA1-associated cancers differ with respect to expression of proteins that are regarded as targets for specific therapies and that 92% of patients with BRCA1-associated cancers may benefit from one or several options for specific therapy (in addition to DNA damaging agents, e.g., cisplatin). About 8% of cancers which do not express therapeutic target proteins may not respond to such therapies. Knowledge of the immunophenotypic predictive profile may help with the recruitment of patients for trials of targeted therapies.
  Body fluids are easily accessible and contain valuable indices for medical diagnosis. Fascinating tools are tumour cells circulating in the peripheral blood of cancer patients. As these cells are extremely rare, they constitute a challenge for clinical diagnostics. In this contribution we present the Raman spectroscopic-based identification of different single cells in suspension that are found in peripheral blood of cancer patients including healthy cells like leukocytes and erythrocytes, and tumour cells like leukaemic cells and cells originating from solid tumours. Leukocytes and erythrocytes were isolated from the peripheral blood of healthy donors while myeloid leukaemia cells (OCI-AML3) and breast carcinoma derived cells (MCF-7, BT-20) were obtained from cell cultures. A laser emitting 785 nm light was used for optical trapping the single cells in the laser focus and to excite the Raman spectrum. Support vector machines were applied to develop a supervised classification model with spectra of 1210 cells originating from three different donors and three independent cultivation batches. Distinguishing tumour cells from healthy cells was achieved with a sensitivity of >99.7% and a specificity of >99.5%. In addition, the correct cell types were predicted with an accuracy of approximately 92%.
  Personalized medicine in the management of patients with prostate cancer is limited to the integration of patient attributes such as age, genetic risk and comorbidities with specific clinical-pathologic variables including serum prostate specific antigen (PSA), imaging and features from the diagnostic prostate needle biopsy or prostatectomy specimen including tumor differentiation (i.e. Gleason), volume and extent of disease (i.e. tumor length and / or percentage, number of positive cores at diagnosis or pathologic stage post surgery including margin status). Although the development of various clinical statistical instruments such as nomograms have provided a mechanism to interrogate such variables, most urologists rely on basic prognostic features of stage, grade and PSA along with clinical judgment to define and understand individual risk and predict health outcomes. Furthermore, unlike other tumor types such as breast cancer, there are no routine ancillary diagnostic studies performed on the prostate needle biopsy or prostatectomy specimen to support and refine the treatment decision process for the individual patient. In this review we will provide a summary of the current practice of predictive statistical modeling in prostate cancer and explore how technical advances in functional histology have played a role in the development and incorporation of a systems based platform for providing a patient-specific risk profile useful for clinical decision making.
  Cancer cells undergo epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) as a program of increased invasion and metastasis during cancer progression. Here, we report that a novel regulator of EMT in cancer cells is protein kinase D1 (PKD1), which is downregulated in advanced prostate, breast, and gastric cancers. Ectopic reexpression of PKD1 in metastatic prostate cancer cells reversibly suppressed expression of mesenchyme-specific genes and increased epithelial markers such as E-cadherin, whereas small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of PKD1 increased expression of mesenchyme markers. Further, PKD1 inhibited tumor growth and metastasis in a tumor xenograft model. PKD1 phosphorylates Ser(11) (S11) on transcription factor Snail, a master EMT regulator and repressor of E-cadherin expression, triggering nuclear export of Snail via 14-3-3σ binding. Snail S11 mutation causes acquisition of mesenchymal traits and expression of stem cell markers. Together, our results suggest that PKD1 functions as a tumor and metastasis suppressor, at least partly by regulating Snail-mediated EMT, and that loss of PKD1 may contribute to acquisition of an aggressive malignant phenotype. Cancer Res; 70(20); 7810-9. ©2010 AACR.
  Amplification of the 8p11-12 region has been found in about 15% of human breast cancers and is associated with poor prognosis. Earlier, we used genomic analysis of copy number and gene expression to perform a detailed analysis of the 8p11-12 amplicon to identify candidate oncogenes in breast cancer. We identified 21 candidate genes and provided evidence that three genes, namely, LSM-1, TC-1, and BAG4, have transforming properties when overexpressed. In the present study, we systematically investigated the transforming properties of 13 newly identified 8p11-12 candidate oncogenes in vitro. WHSC1L1, DDHD2, and ERLIN2 were most potently transforming oncogenes based on the number of altered phenotypes expressed by the cells. WHSC1L1 contains a PWWP-domain that is a methyl-lysine recognition motif involved in histone code modification and epigenetic regulation of gene expression. Knockdown of WHSC1L1 in 8p11-12-amplified breast cancer cells resulted in profound loss of growth and survival of these cells. Further, we identified several WHSC1L1 target genes, one of which is iroquois homeobox 3 gene (IRX3), a member of the Iroquois homeobox transcription factor family. Cancer Res; 70(21); OF1-11. ©2010 AACR.
  The transcription factor NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) binds the antioxidant DNA response element (ARE) to activate important cellular cytoprotective defense systems. Recently several types of cancers have been shown to overexpress Nrf2, but its role in the cellular response to radiation therapy has yet to be fully determined. In this study, we report that single doses of ionizing radiation from 2 to 8 Gy activate ARE-dependent transcription in breast cancer cells in a dose-dependent manner, but only after a delay of five days. Clinically relevant daily dose fractions of radiation also increased ARE-dependent transcription, but again only after five days. Downstream activation of Nrf2-ARE-dependent gene and protein markers, such as heme oxygenase-1, occurred, whereas Nrf2-deficient fibroblasts were incapable of these responses. Compared with wild-type fibroblasts, Nrf2-deficient fibroblasts had relatively high basal levels of reactive oxygen species that increased greatly five days after radiation exposure. Further, in vitro clonogenic survival assays and in vivo sublethal whole body irradiation tests showed that Nrf2 deletion increased radiation sensitivity, whereas Nrf2-inducing drugs did not increase radioresistance. Our results indicate that the Nrf2-ARE pathway is important to maintain resistance to irradiation, but that it operates as a second-tier antioxidant adaptive response system activated by radiation only under specific circumstances, including those that may be highly relevant to tumor response during standard clinical dose-fractionated radiation therapy. Cancer Res; 70(21); OF1-10. ©2010 AACR.
  Signaling by urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) can cause epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in cultured breast cancer cells. In this report, we show that uPAR signaling can also induce cancer stem cell (CSC)-like properties. Ectopic overexpression of uPAR in human MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cells promoted the emergence of a CD24(-)/CD44(+) phenotype, characteristic of CSCs, while increasing the cell surface abundance of integrin subunits β1/CD29 and α6/CD49f that represent putative mammary gland stem cell biomarkers. uPAR overexpression increased mammosphere formation in vitro and tumor formation in an immunocompromized severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) mouse model of orthotopic breast cancer. Hypoxic conditions that are known to induce EMT in MDA-MB-468 cells also increased cell surface β1/CD29, mimicking the effects of uPAR overexpression. Antagonizing uPAR effector signaling pathways reversed the increase in cell surface integrin expression. Whereas uPAR overexpression did not induce EMT in MCF-7 breast cancer cells, CSC-like properties were nevertheless still induced along with an increase in tumor initiation and growth in the orthotopic setting in SCID mice. Notably, in MCF-7 cell mammospheres, which display a well-defined acinus-like structure with polarized expression of E-cadherin and β1-integrin, cell collapse into the central cavity was decreased by uPAR overexpression, suggesting that uPAR signaling may stabilize epithelial morphology. In summary, our findings show that uPAR signaling can induce CSC-like properties in breast cancer cells, either concomitantly with or separately from EMT. Cancer Res; 70(21); OF1-11. ©2010 AACR.
  The DNA damage response (DDR) activates downstream pathways including cell cycle checkpoints. The cyclin D1 gene is overexpressed or amplified in many human cancers and is required for gastrointestinal, breast, and skin tumors in murine models. A common polymorphism in the human cyclin D1 gene is alternatively spliced, resulting in cyclin D1a and D1b proteins that differ in their carboxyl terminus. Cyclin D1 overexpression enhances DNA damage-induced apoptosis. The role of cyclin D1 and the alternative splice form in regulating the DDR is not well understood. Herein cyclin D1a overexpression enhanced the DDR as characterized by induction of γH2AX phosphorylation, the assembly of DNA repair foci, specific recruitment of DNA repair factors to chromatin, and G(2)-M arrest. Cyclin D1 deletion in fibroblasts or small interfering RNA-mediated reduction of endogenous cyclin D1 in colon cancer cells reduced the 5-fluorouracil-mediated DDR. Mechanistic studies showed that cyclin D1a, like DNA repair factors, elicited the DDR when stably associated with chromatin. Cancer Res; 70(21); OF1-10. ©2010 AACR.
  In the earliest stages of metastasis, breast cancer cells must reorganize the cytoskeleton to affect cell shape change and promote cell invasion and motility. These events require the cytoskeletal regulators Cdc42 and Rho, their effectors such as N-WASp/WAVE, and direct inducers of actin polymerization such as Arp2/3. Little consideration has been given to molecules that shape the cell membrane. The F-BAR proteins CIP4, TOCA-1, and FBP17 generate membrane curvature and act as scaffolding proteins for activated Cdc42 and N-WASp. We found that expression of CIP4, but not TOCA-1 or FBP17, was increased in invasive breast cancer cell lines in comparison with weakly or noninvasive breast cancer cell lines. Endogenous CIP4 localized to the leading edge of migrating cells and to invadopodia in cells invading gelatin. Because CIP4 serves as a scaffolding protein for Cdc42, Src, and N-WASp, we tested whether loss of CIP4 could result in decreased N-WASp function. Interaction between CIP4 and N-WASp was epidermal growth factor responsive, and CIP4 silencing by small interfering RNA caused decreased tyrosine phosphorylation of N-WASp at a Src-dependent activation site (Y256). CIP4 silencing also impaired the migration and invasion of MDA-MB-231 cells and was associated with decreased formation of invadopodia and gelatin degradation. This study presents a new role for CIP4 in the promotion of migration and invasion of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells and establishes the contribution of F-BAR proteins to cancer cell motility and invasion. Cancer Res; 70(21); OF1-10. ©2010 AACR.
  CONTEXT: Cancer screening has been integrated into routine primary care but does not benefit patients with limited life expectancy. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the extent to which patients with advanced cancer continue to be screened for new cancers. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Utilization of cancer screening procedures (mammography, Papanicolaou test, prostate-specific antigen [PSA], and lower gastrointestinal [GI] endoscopy) was assessed in 87,736 fee-for-service Medicare enrollees aged 65 years or older diagnosed with advanced lung, colorectal, pancreatic, gastroesophageal, or breast cancer between 1998 and 2005, and reported to one of the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) tumor registries. Participants were followed up until death or December 31, 2007, whichever came first. A group of 87,307 Medicare enrollees without cancer were individually matched by age, sex, race, and SEER registry to patients with cancer and observed over the same period to evaluate screening rates in context. Demographic and clinical characteristics associated with screening were also investigated. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: For each cancer screening test, utilization rates were defined as the percentage of patients who were screened following the diagnosis of an incurable cancer. RESULTS: Among women following advanced cancer diagnosis compared with controls, at least 1 screening mammogram was received by 8.9% (95% confidence interval [CI], 8.6%-9.1%) vs 22.0% (95% CI, 21.7%-22.5%); Papanicolaou test screening was received by 5.8% (95% CI, 5.6%-6.1%) vs 12.5% (95% CI, 12.2%-12.8%). Among men following advanced cancer diagnosis compared with controls, PSA test was received by 15.0% (95% CI, 14.7%-15.3%) vs 27.2% (95% CI, 26.8%-27.6%). For all patients following advanced diagnosis compared with controls, lower GI endoscopy was received by 1.7% (95% CI, 1.6%-1.8%) vs 4.7% (95% CI, 4.6%-4.9%). Screening was more frequent among patients with a recent history of screening (16.2% [95% CI, 15.4%-16.9%] of these patients had mammography, 14.7% [95% CI, 13.7%-15.6%] had a Papanicolaou test, 23.3% [95% CI, 22.6%-24.0%] had a PSA test, and 6.1% [95% CI, 5.2%-7.0%] had lower GI endoscopy). CONCLUSION: A sizeable proportion of patients with advanced cancer continue to undergo cancer screening tests that do not have a meaningful likelihood of providing benefit.
  PURPOSE: PIK3CA mutations are frequent in breast cancer and activate the PI3K/Akt pathway. Unexpectedly, PIK3CA mutation appears in general to be associated with better outcome. In a cohort of patients where both primary and metastatic lesions were available the objective was to assess changes in PIK3CA mutations. We wished to discern whether selective pressures occur and the influence of PIK3CA mutation on time to recurrence.EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor blocks were obtained from 104 patients with paired samples from primary tumors and corresponding asynchronous metastatic breast tumors. Samples were analysed for PIK3CA mutations (exon 9 and 20) as well as immunohistochemical evaluation for PTEN, pAKT, Ki67, ER and HER2. RESULTS: PIK3CA mutation was detected in 45 % of the primary tumors. Overall there was a net gain in mutation in metastatic disease, to 53 %; nonetheless there were instances where metastases were wild type in patients with PIK3CA mutant primary tumors. Laser capture microdissection on a subset of cases revealed microheterogeneity for PIK3CA mutational status in the primary tumor. PIK3CA mutants overall showed a significantly longer time to first recurrence than wild type cases (p=0.03). CONCLUSIONS: PIK3CA mutations occur at high frequency in primary and metastatic breast cancer; these may not necessarily confer increased aggressiveness as mutants had a longer time to recurrence. Because PIK3CA status quite frequently changes between primary and metastatic disease, it emphasizes the necessity of assessing the PIK3CA status in the metastatic lesion for selection of PIK3CA inhibitor therapy.
  PURPOSE Distress has been recognized as the sixth vital sign in cancer care and several guidelines recommend routine screening. Despite this, screening for distress is rarely conducted and infrequently evaluated. METHODS A program of routine online screening for distress was implemented for new patients with breast and lung cancer. Patients were randomly assigned to one of three conditions: (1) minimal screening: the distress thermometer (DT) only plus usual care; (2) full screening: DT, problem checklist, Psychological Screen for Cancer part C measuring anxiety and depression, a personalized report summarizing concerns and the report on the medical file; or (3) triage: full screening plus optional personalized phone triage with referral to resources. Patients in all conditions received an information packet and were reassessed 3 months later with the full screening battery. Results Five hundred eighty-five patients with breast cancer and 549 patients with lung cancer were assessed at baseline (89% of all patients), and 75.5% retained for follow-up. High prevalence of baseline distress was found across patients. Twenty percent fewer patients with lung cancer in triage continued to have high distress at follow-up compared to those in the other two groups, and patients with breast cancer in the full screening and triage conditions showed lower distress at follow-up than those in minimal screening. The best predictor of decreased anxiety and depression in full screening and triage conditions was receiving a referral to psychosocial services. CONCLUSION Routine online screening is feasible in a large cancer center and may help to reduce future distress levels, particularly when coupled with uptake of appropriate resources.
  PURPOSE The National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project C-08 trial was designed to investigate the safety and efficacy of adding bevacizumab to modified FOLFOX6 (mFOLFOX6; ie, infusional/bolus fluorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin) for the adjuvant treatment of patients with stages II to III colon cancer. METHODS Patients received mFOLFOX6 every 2 weeks for 26 weeks alone or modified as FOLFOX6 + bevacizumab (5 mg/kg every 2 weeks for 52 weeks [ie, experimental group]). The primary end point was disease-free survival (DFS). Results Among 2,672 analyzed patients, demographic factors were well balanced by treatment. With a median follow-up of 35.6 months, the addition of bevacizumab to mFOLFOX6 did not result in an overall significant increase in DFS (hazard ratio [HR], 0.89; 95% CI, 0.76 to 1.04; P = .15). The point estimates for 3-year DFS for the overall population were 77.4% and 75.5% for the experimental and control arms, respectively. For patients with stages II and III diseases, these same estimates were 87.4% and 84.7%, respectively, for stage II and 74.2% and 72.4%, respectively, for stage III. Exploratory analyses found that the effect of bevacizumab on DFS was different before and after a 15-month landmark (time-by-treatment interaction P value < .0001). Bevacizumab had a strong effect before the landmark (HR, 0.61; 95% CI, 0.48 to 0.78; P < .001) but no significant effect after (HR, 1.22; 95% CI, 0.98 to 1.52; P = .076). CONCLUSION Bevacizumab for 1 year with mFOLFOX6 does not significantly prolong DFS in stages II and III colon cancer. However, a significant but transient effect during bevacizumab exposure was observed in the experimental arm. We postulate that this observation reflects a biologic effect during bevacizumab exposure. Given the lack of improvement in DFS, the use of bevacizumab cannot be recommended for use in the adjuvant treatment of patients with colon cancer.
  Breast cancer throughout the world is a significant health problem for women. Small clusters of microcalcifications appearing as collection of white spots on mammograms indicate an early warning of breast cancer. In present work we have initiated computer?aided analysis of mammograms to automate the diagnostic procedures for breast cancer screening using multiresolution and FCM based clustering algorithms. Further region growing approach has been applied to segment considerably larger calcifications and the masses. The advantage of the proposed method is its ability to detect both tiny and comparatively larger calcifications in a single image and to reduce the false-positive appearance of microcalcifications in breast.
  BACKGROUND: Cancer health disparities affecting low-income and minority patients are well documented. Root-causes are multifactorial, including diagnostic and treatment delays, social and financial barriers, and poor communication. Patient navigation and communication coaching (activation) are potential interventions to address disparities in cancer treatment. The purpose of this clinical trial is to test the effectiveness of an intervention combining patient navigation and activation to improve cancer treatment. METHODS: The Rochester Patient Navigation Research Program (PNRP) is a National Cancer Institute-sponsored, patient-level randomized trial (RCT) of patient navigation and activation, targeting newly-diagnosed breast and colorectal cancer patients in Rochester, NY. The goal of the program is to decrease cancer health disparities by addressing barriers to receipt of cancer care and promoting patient self-efficacy. The intervention uses trained, paraprofessional patient navigators recruited from the target community, and a detailed training and supervisory program. Recruited patients are randomly assigned to receive either usual care (except for baseline and follow-up questionnaires and interviews) or intervention. The intervention patients receive tailored assistance from their patient navigators, including phone calls, in-person meetings, and behind-the-scenes coordination of care. A total of 344 patients have been recruited. Outcomes measured at three month intervals include timeliness of care, patient adherence, patient satisfaction, quality of life, self-efficacy, health literacy, and cancer knowledge. DISCUSSION: This unique intervention combining patient navigation and patient activation is designed to address the multifactorial problem of cancer health disparities. If successful, this study will affect the design and implementation of patient navigation programs. Trials Registration: clinicaltrials.gov identifier NCT00496678.
  INTRODUCTION: A family history of later-onset breast cancer (FHLBC) may suggest multi-factorial inheritance of breast cancer risk, including unhealthy lifestyle behaviors that may be shared within families. We assessed whether adherence to lifestyle behaviors recommended for breast cancer prevention--including maintaining a healthful body weight, being physically active and limiting alcohol intake--modifies breast cancer risk attributed to FHLBC in postmenopausal women. METHODS: Breast cancer outcomes through August 2003 were analyzed in relationship to lifestyle and risk factors collected by questionnaire during enrollment (between 1993 and 1998) of 85,644 postmenopausal women into the Women's Health Initiative Observational Study. RESULTS: During a mean follow-up of 5.4 years, 1997 women were diagnosed with invasive breast cancer. The rate of invasive breast cancer among women with an FHLBC who participated in all three behaviors was 5.94 per 1,000 woman-years, compared with 6.97 per 1,000 woman-years among women who participated in none of the behaviors. The rate among women with no FHLBC who participated in all three behavioral conditions was 3.51 per 1,000 woman-years compared to 4.67 per 1,000 woman-years for those who participated in none. We did not observe a clinically important departure from additive effects (Interaction Contrast: 0.00014; 95% CI: -0.00359, 0.00388). CONCLUSIONS: Participating in breast healthy behaviours was beneficial to postmenopausal women and the degree of this benefit was the same for women with and without an FHLBC.
  The urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) and its main inhibitor PAI-1 play key roles in tumorassociated processes such as the degradation of the extracellular matrix (ECM), tissue remodeling, cell adhesion and migration. Elevated expression of both molecules is known to correlate with negative outcomes in node negative breast cancer. To date, these molecules are the only prognostic markers to have reached the highest level of evidence (LOE I) in multi-centered clinical trials for prognosis of node negative breast cancer. Unfortunately, the clinical utility of these molecules as markers is limited by the use of enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA) tests for their detection. The ELISA relies on the use of fresh or frozen tissue, which are rarely available in routine clinical settings. In this review article, we provide an overview of the clinical relevance of uPA and PAI-1 and present alternative methods for their detection. Common uPA and PAI-1 detection methods discussed in literature include RT-PCR-based assays and classical immunohistochemistry approaches. In recent years, attempts have been made to isolate and analyze proteins of formalin fixed, paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues. These new methods are of special interest because up to now neither RT-PCR nor immunohistochemistry are recommended for the detection of uPA and PAI-1. Here, we present an approach for the analysis of uPA and PAI-1 directly from FFPE tissues that may eventually overcome the limitations of current assays and make the use of both markers widely available for routine prognosis and therapy decisions for breast cancer patients.
  This qualitative focus group study describes posttraumatic growth experiences of African American adolescents currently coping with parental breast cancer. Twelve adolescents participated in three focus groups assessing their experiences with parental cancer. Spontaneous accounts of posttraumatic growth were reported by all participants. A content analysis revealed reports in four of the five domains of posttraumatic growth identified by Tedeschi and Calhoun (1996) which included: greater appreciation for life, enhanced interpersonal relationships, increased sense of personal strengths, and changed priorities. An additional domain, change in health behaviors and attitudes, also emerged. These findings add important knowledge to the developing field of research in posttraumatic growth in populations where available research is scarce, especially among adolescents and racial minorities. (PsycINFO Database Record (c) 2010 APA, all rights reserved).
  Insulin glargine was the first long-acting human insulin analogue to be authorised in the European Union, in the early 2000s, for the treatment of diabetes mellitus. It has about a 6-fold increase in affinity for the insulinlike growth factor 1 (EGF-1) receptor compared with natural human insulin, which may stimulate tumour development. Four European epidemiological studies published in 2009 examined the risk of cancer in diabetic patients treated with insulin glargine. One of these studies, conducted in Germany, showed a statistically significant dose-dependent increase in the risk of cancer. Two other studies, one in Scotland and the other in Sweden, showed an increase in the risk of breast cancer. The fourth study, conducted in the UK, showed a lower risk of cancer in patients on metformin. This evidence is inconclusive, notably because these studies did not take confounding factors into account. Nevertheless, the results tend to be similar and consistent with certain pharmacological mechanisms. In practice, pending more solid evidence, these epidemiological results should be taken into account when weighing the risk-benefit balance of insulin therapy for diabetic patients, on a case by case basis, depending on the type of diabetes, patient history, life expectancy, and the possible practical advantages of insulin glargine.
  Recent studies have revealed that hScrib, the human homolog of Drosophila Scribble, is an apical-basal polarity determinant and an essential component of the adherens junction. In addition, hScrib has a critical role in the inhibition of cell proliferation through cell cycle progression. hScrib has been reported to be involved in the processes of many cancers, such as breast cancer, cervical cancer, colon carcinoma, etc.; however, the correlation between hScrib and endometrial cancer has not been identified. To address a possible role of hScrib in the development of endometrial cancer, we examined the localization and expression of hScrib in endometrial cancer. The present study demonstrated that decreased expression and changed localization of hScrib were associated with clinical stage, histopathological differentiation, and lymph node metastasis in endometrial cancer. hScrib might share an adherens junction with basolateral membrane partially by acting on E-cadherin in endometrial cancer. This evidence suggests that hScrib is involved in the development of endometrial cancer.
  The objective of this study was to analyze the genotype distributions and allele frequencies for ROCK2 Thr431Asn and Arg83Lys polymorphisms among breast cancer patients. In this case-control study, 223 patients with breast cancer were recruited and divided into two groups according to metastases (n = 128) and without metastases (n = 95). Genomic DNA from the patients and the control cases (n = 150) was analyzed by real-time PCR using a Light-Cycler. Neither genotype distributions nor the allele frequencies for the Arg83Lys polymorphism showed a significant difference between the groups. Although no marked changes were observed with nonmetastatic group, a statistically significant association was found between the control and metastatic group for the Thr431Asn polymorphism. Although homozygous carriers of the Thr431Thr genotype were more frequent, heterozygous carriers of the Thr431Asn genotype were less frequent among the metastatic patients than among controls. There was also an increase in Thr431 allele (60.5% in patients vs. 51.7% in controls) and decrease in Asn431 allele frequencies (48.3% in control vs. 39.5% in metastatic patients) in metastatic groups (p = 0.036). Our results demonstrate that Thr431Asn polymorphism of the ROCK2 gene could be a risk factor for the metastases of the breast cancer, and may help in predicting the prognosis.
  Raman Mapping spectra were collected on the samples of the normal human breast duct epithelia and the infiltrating duct carcinoma with the excitation wavelength of 633 nm and fitted with the morphological model which was presented before by the author. The normalized coefficients were calculated and used to make Raman images. Examining these images, the authors find that they show quite clearly the distribution of the chemicals which the basis spectrum was mainly derived from and that the DNA coefficient image also indicates the positions and scales of the cell nucleus, while the bright DNA area is bigger and brighter for the infiltrating duct carcinoma than for the normal breast dust epithelia, suggesting the cell nucleus in cancer tissue are larger than those in normal tissue. The correlation coefficient images were also made on these mapping spectra and examined in comparison with these model images, and it was showed that the model images have higher resolution and sensitivity although they are very similar. This work is helpful to understanding the morphological basis of the breast tissue Raman spectra and to developing the Raman diagnostic method for breast tumor.
  BACKGROUND: In Mexico, cervical cancer is the second leading cause of death in women after breast cancer. The human papillomavirus is associated with intraepithelial lesions, detected up to 99.7% of cervical carcinomas. Despite being easy to detect is a condition that many women suffer. OBJECTIVE: To determine the diagnostic utility of the visual inspection with acetic acid of the uterine cervix compared with the cervical cytology. PATIENTS AND METHOD: Study of diagnostic tests. The study was realized in the Centro de Atención Materno Infantil y Planificación Familiar of the Instituto de Investigación Científica, Durango, Mexico, research of the Juárez University of the State of Durango, from August 23, 2005 to November 13, 2006. 1,521 participants were examined who went consecutively to opportune detection of cervical cancer. One doctor practiced the test of acetic acid and cervical cytology to them, and one digital photograph, which was evaluated by three inter-observers triple blind. Those that was positive to anyone of these tests, were remitted to colposcopy and/or biopsy; also to 10% of selected negative population randomly was realized this procedure. Sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive values and exactitude were determined. For the agreement inter-observer index of Kappa was used. RESULTS: Sensitivity, specificity, values predictive positive, negative and exactitude for the visual inspection with acetic acid were 20, 97, 5 and 99%, respectively. For the cervical cytology were of 80, 99, 57 and 99%, respectively. The force of agreement between the interobservant was poor. CONCLUSIONS: In this study cervical cytology was more useful than visual inspection with acetic acid to detect dysplasias or cervical cancer opportunely, due to detect all the positive true cases confirmed by biopsy.
  In women, breast cancer causes over one million new cases each year, of which about half occur in industrialized countries, however, is in developing countries like ours, where most deaths due to this cause. Currently, the breast cancer is the leading cause of death from malignancy in women over 25 years. The conclusions of the Third Review of the National Consensus on Diagnosis and Treatment of Breast Cancer are a guide for oncologists, mastologists and the medical community in general. This review involved more than 50 physicians with national recognition of all institutions and specialties related to this disease, in order to contribute their knowledge.
  In women, breast cancer causes over one million new cases each year, of which about half occur in industrialized countries, however, is in developing countries like ours, where most deaths due to this cause. Currently, the breast cancer is the leading cause of death from malignancy in women over 25 years. The conclusions of the Third Review of the National Consensus on Diagnosis and Treatment of Breast Cancer are a guide for oncologists, mastologists and the medical community in general. This review involved more than 50 physicians with national recognition of all institutions and specialties related to this disease, in order to contribute their knowledge.
  BACKGROUND: The chemotherapy commonly used for the treatment of breast cancer affect the fertility and could cause premature ovarian failure. The subsequent pregnancy to the breast cancer therefore it is not habitual. OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to identify the effects of the chemotherapy in the women reproductive life; to evaluate the frequency of the women that experienced a later pregnancy after treatment of cancer, as well as the effects of the subsequent pregnancy on the breast cancer. We report our experience in the 14 year period. MATERIAL AND METHOD: As retrospective design, of 14 cases with breast cancer and subsequent pregnancy, from March 1994 to June 2008; demographic variables, clinical presentation, histopathological data, diagnostic procedures, treatments and results of the pregnancy were identified. RESULTS: The mean (M +/- SD) age of gestational women was of 31.5 +/- 5.2 years; the 83.3% women received adyuvant chemotherapy with antraciclines; the patients with regional illness (> 4 N+) and advanced illness had an adverse presage; the systemic relapse and progression showed in 42.8% of the cases. The pregnancy to term was presented in half of the cases in the first two years and in a third part, later to the 2 years of having concluded the oncological treatment; of the fourteen patients with breast cancer presented a total of 16 pregnancies: 9 were of term, 3 of preterm and 4 abortions. CONCLUSIONS: The study founds are based on a series of cases, which do not suggest that the pregnancy after the diagnosis and treatment of breast cancer has some adverse effect in the patients survival, for what the patients can conceive later to the oncological treatment. However, in this study it was observed that the effect of the advanced stage and positive axillary ganglion (> 4) influence in the relapses.
  Current theory on the influence of breast cancer on bone describes metastasis of tumor cells to bone tissue, followed by induction of osteoclasts and bone degradation. Tumor influences on bone health in pre- or non-metastatic models are unknown.Female rats (n=48, 52 d old) were injected with N-methyl-N-nitrosourea to induce breast cancer. Animals were sacrificed 10 wks later and tumors weighed and histologically classified. Right femora were extracted for testing of bone mineral density (BMD) by dual x-ray absorptiometry (DXA), bone mechanical strength by 3-point bend and femoral neck bend testing and structure by micro computed tomography (µCT).Of 48 rats, 22 developed one or more tumors in response to MNU injection by 10 weeks. Presence of any tumor predicted significantly poorer bone health in 17 out of 28 measures. In tumored vs. non-tumored animals, BMD was adversely affected by 3%, force at failure of the femoral midshaft by 4%, force at failure of the femoral neck by 12%, and various trabecular structural parameters by 6 to 27% (all p <0.05). Similarly, greater tumor burden represented by total tumor weight adversely correlated with bone outcomes: r = -0.51 for BMD, -0.42 and -0.35 for femur midshaft force and work at failure and between 0.36 and 0.59 (absolute values) for trabecular architecture (all p < 0.05).Presence of MNU-induced tumors and total tumor burden showed a negative association with bone health of the femur in rats, in the absence of metastasis. Further study is required to elucidate mechanisms for this association. © 2010 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.
  BACKGROUND:: The purposes of this study were to address a persistent controversy as to whether the ER status of a primary tumor remains stable during progression to metastasis and to evaluate the influence of disease course and prior systemic therapy on ER status. METHODS:: Breast carcinomas from 227 women with known ER status in both primary tumor and paired metastasis were retrospectively reviewed. ER status was compared between primary and metastatic tumors with respect to metastatic site, interval between two ER assays, and intervening chemotherapy and endocrine therapy. Semiquantitative comparison of ER values was performed for 92 tumor pairs. RESULTS:: ER status agreed in 210 (92.5%) patients, including 147 positive and 63 negative. Of the 17 patients (7.5%) with discordant ER status, both negative to positive conversion (n = 7) and positive to negative conversion (n = 10) were observed. ER discordance was not significantly associated with metastatic site (locoregional vs distant), time interval between assays (<5 years vs. ≥5 years), or intervening chemotherapy and endocrine therapy. Semiquantitative levels of ER expression were similar between primary and metastatic tumors. In discordant cases, variations in testing methods and marginal scores were common. CONCLUSIONS:: ER status in breast carcinoma is generally stable during progression to metastasis. Preanalytical and analytical variability may contribute to discordance in some cases. Given the importance of ER status for clinical management, ER testing in metastatic breast carcinoma should be repeated, especially for patients whose clinical courses are not compatible with stated ER status. Cancer 2010. © 2010 American Cancer Society.
  BACKGROUND:: Few data are available on how race/ethnicity, insurance, and socioeconomic status (SES) interrelate to influence breast cancer treatment. The authors examined care for a national cohort of breast cancer patients to assess whether insurance and SES were associated with racial/ethnic differences in care. METHODS:: The authors used multivariate logistic regression to assess the probability of definitive locoregional therapy, hormone receptor testing, and adjuvant systemic therapy among 662,117 white, black, and Hispanic women diagnosed with invasive breast cancer during 1998-2005 at National Cancer Data Base hospitals. In additional models, the authors included insurance and area-level SES to determine whether these variables were associated with observed racial/ethnic disparities. RESULTS:: Most women were white (86%), 10% were black, and 4% were Hispanic. Most had private insurance (51%) or Medicare (41%). Among eligible patients, 80.0% (stage I/II) had definitive locoregional therapy, 98.5% (stage I-IV) had hormone receptor testing, and 53.1% and 50.2% (stage I-III) received adjuvant hormonal therapy and chemotherapy, respectively. After adjustment, black (vs white) women had less definitive locoregional therapy (odds ratio [OR], 0.91; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.88-0.94), hormonal therapy (OR, 0.90; 95% CI, 0.87-0.93), and chemotherapy (OR, 0.87; 95% CI, 0.84-0.91). Hispanic (vs white) women were also less likely to receive hormonal therapy. Hormone receptor testing did not differ by race/ethnicity. Racial disparities persisted despite adjusting for insurance and SES. CONCLUSIONS:: The modest association between black (vs white) race and guideline-recommended breast cancer care was insensitive to adjustment for insurance and area-level SES. Further study is required to better understand disparities and to ensure receipt of care. Cancer 2010. © 2010 American Cancer Society.
  Transmembrane proteins of the tetraspanin superfamily are implicated in a broad spectrum of cellular processes in many biological systems in both health and disease. Tetraspanins form specialized membrane microdomains on the cell surface which control cell proliferation and migration through various adhesion and growth factor receptors. Recent extensive research has shown that expression of various tetraspanins and their associated partners is deregulated in human malignancies. Although, for the most part, the degree of involvement of tetraspanins in carcinogenesis remains to be established, increasing evidence suggests that these proteins might be of clinical significance in at least some malignancies. Here we provide a comprehensive review of the existing data on expression of tetraspanins in breast cancer and other human epithelial tumours, with an emphasis on their value as potential prognostic markers. Copyright © 2010 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
  PURPOSE: Rational therapy planning should aim to minimize the rate of axillary lymph node dissection (ALND) in patients without metastatic disease. By the same token, the frequency of sentinel lymph node biopsies (SLNB) should not be unnecessarily high in patients with axillary node disease. Preoperative axillary ultrasonography is a generally available noninvasive technique for assessing nodal status. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Based on retrospective data, we analyzed the sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive value, and efficiency of preoperative ultrasonography US. A total of 429 axillary ultrasonographic examinations were included, and the management decisions were based on the ultrasonographic findings. Patients with suspicious US results were scheduled for ALND, while patients with unremarkable findings underwent SLNB. RESULTS: Axillary metastases were found in 146 of 429 (34 %) cases. In 75 of 429 (17 %) axillary examinations, ultrasonography revealed suspicious findings. In these cases, we proceeded with ALND, thereby reducing the number of SLNB by 17 %. 219 of 429 cases were classified correctly as not having metastasis, thus lowering the rate of ALND, which is associated with higher postoperative morbidity, by 51 %. Preoperative ultrasonography had a sensitivity of 53.6 %, specificity of 75.5 %, and a positive predictive value of 77.3 %. The negative predictive value was 51.3 % and the efficiency was 68.5 %. CONCLUSION: Ultrasonography is a moderately sensitive, but quite specific, preoperative method for assessing the axillary lymph nodes.
  PURPOSE: Mammography in screening or on indication is regarded as the gold standard for breast examination to detect breast cancer. The present study was performed to evaluate breast ultrasound examination (BU) as a supplement to physical breast examination in a gynecological office setting. MATERIALS AND METHODS: BU was performed concomitantly with all physical breast examinations in a gynecological clinic. The results of all BUs during a 10-year period using the patients' personal numbers were crossed with the Danish Cancer Registry and the Danish Pathology Data Bank. All new breast malignancies registered from the date of BU and 12 months later were included. RESULTS: A total of 3030 BUs of both breasts was performed in 1428 women. Twenty-eight new breast malignancies were registered in 27 patients. Physical examination did not reveal any tumors not detected by ultrasound. Sixteen of the 28 malignancies were non-palpable (57 %). BU detected 25 of these malignancies, thus yielding a sensitivity of 89 %. Mammography performed within 12 months of the diagnosis was negative in 11 patients resulting in a rate of 44 % of malignancies with a negative mammography result. The tumors measured an average of 11 mm (range 4 - 30 mm) using the largest diameter. CONCLUSION: BU offers substantial help for the detection of breast cancer. The sensitivity is high, and in a gynecological setting where ultrasound is used for almost every consultation, it is natural to use the scanner for the breast examination. Larger studies with evaluation of interobserver variability for tumor detection by ultrasound are needed.
  Breast cancer is the most common malignancy with the highest incidence among women in the world. Metastasis is the major reason for breast cancer-related deaths. The precise molecular circuitry that governs the metastasis process has not been completely understood. Discoveries of microRNAs (miRNAs) open a new avenue for cancer metastasis research. It has become clear that alterations of miRNA expression contribute to cancer pathogenesis. miRNAs control a wide array of physiological and pathological processes, including development, differentiation, cellular proliferation, programmed cell death, oncogenesis, and metastasis by modulating the expression of their cognate target genes through cleaving mRNA molecules or inhibiting their translation. Some miRNAs are associated with the invasive and metastatic phenotype of breast cancer cell lines or identified in metastatic tumor tissues and lymph nodes. Some miRNAs serve as metastasis suppressors and their expression is frequently downregulated or lost in both breast cancer cell lines and metastatic foci. Some miRNAs are considered to play key roles in the phenotype formation of breast cancer stem cells. This review will focus on recent discoveries related to the miRNAs involved in the metastasis of breast cancer and discuss the implications for the diagnosis, prognosis, and therapeutic strategies of breast cancer.
  Poor aqueous solubility limits the therapeutic index of paclitaxel as an anti-cancer drug. Synthesis of soluble prodrugs of paclitaxel, or conjugation of the drug to macromolecular carriers have been reported to increase its water-solubility. Macromolecular drug carriers have an added advantage of targeting the drug to the tumor site due to the abnormal tumor blood and lymphatic vasculature. This study describes a thermally responsive macromolecular carrier, elastin-like polypeptide (ELP) for the delivery of paclitaxel. Paclitaxel was bound to ELP by conjugation with the 6-maleimidocaproyl hydrazone derivative of paclitaxel, an acid-sensitive paclitaxel prodrug, for the potential treatment of breast cancer. Focused hyperthermia above a specific transition temperature at the site of a tumor causes ELP to aggregate and accumulate, thereby increasing the local concentration of the drug cargo. The paclitaxel prodrug described here bears an acid-sensitive linker that is cleavable at the lysosomal/endosomal pH, which allows a controlled intracellular release of the drug. The ELP-delivered paclitaxel in the presence of hyperthermia inhibits MCF-7 cell proliferation by stabilizing the microtubule structures, arresting the cells at the G2/M stage, and inducing apoptosis in a manner similar to conventional paclitaxel. It also inhibits proliferation of a paclitaxel resistant MCF-7 cell line. These data provide an in vitro proof of concept for the use of ELP as a delivery vehicle of paclitaxel.
  BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Fulvestrant, an oestrogen receptor (ER) antagonist with no known agonist effects, has shown activity in postmenopausal patients with ER-positive advanced breast cancer recurring or progressing following prior endocrine therapy. This double-blind, double-dummy, randomised phase III study (NCT00327769) was designed to compare the efficacy and safety of fulvestrant versus anastrozole in advanced breast cancer of Chinese postmenopausal women whose disease has progressed following prior endocrine treatment. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 234 patients were randomised to fulvestrant 250 mg/month (n = 121) or 1 mg/day anastrozole (n = 113), together with matching placebo. The primary endpoint was time to progression (TTP). Secondary endpoints included objective response rate (ORR), duration of response (DoR), clinical benefit rate (CBR) and time to treatment failure (TTF). RESULTS: Baseline characteristics were similar, with the possible exception that a higher number of fulvestrant patients had received two prior chemotherapy regimens. Median TTP was 110 days in the fulvestrant group versus 159 days in the anastrozole group (hazard ratio [HR], 1.314; 95% confidence intervals [CI], 0.948, 1.822; P = 0.101). ORR was 10% in the fulvestrant group and 14% in the anastrozole group. Median DoR from randomisation to progression was 436 days versus 432 days for the fulvestrant and anastrozole groups, respectively. CBR for fulvestrant (36.1%) versus anastrozole (48.2%) was not statistically different between the groups. TTF (110 days versus 147 days for the fulvestrant and anastrozole groups, respectively) was not statistically different between the treatments (HR, 1.307; 95% CI, 0.961, 1.778; P = 0.088). Both treatments were well tolerated, with only two patients treated with fulvestrant and four patients treated with anastrozole withdrawn from study treatment due to adverse events. CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate that fulvestrant 250 mg and anastrozole were similarly effective and well tolerated in the treatment of postmenopausal Chinese women with advanced breast cancer whose disease had progressed or recurred on prior endocrine treatment.
  This study presents the design and optimization for in vitro use of a new versatile chemotaxis device called the NANIVID (NANo IntraVital Imaging Device), developed using advanced nano/micro fabrication techniques. The device is fabricated using microphotolithographic techniques and two substrates are bonded together using a thin polymer layer creating a sealed device with one outlet. The main structure of the device consists of two Pyrex substrates: an etched chemoattractant reservoir and a top cover, with a final size of 0.2 × 2 × 3 mm. This reservoir contains a hydrogel blend with EGF which diffuses out through a small (∼9(.)10(3)μm(2)) outlet. This reservoir sustains a steady release of growth factor into the surrounding environment for several hours establishing a consistent concentration gradient from the device. The focus of this study was to design and optimize the new device for cell chemotaxis studies in breast cancer cells in cell culture. Our results show that we have created a flexible, cheap, miniature and autonomous chemotaxis device and demonstrate its usefulness in 2D and 3D cell culture. We also provide preliminary data for use of the device in vivo.
  Background Accurate estimates of cancer survival are important for assessing optimal patient care and prognosis. Evaluation of these estimates via relative survival (a ratio of observed and expected survival rates) requires a population life table that is matched to the cancer population by age, sex, race and/or ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and ideally risk factors for the cancer under examination. Because life tables for all subgroups in a study may be unavailable, we investigated whether cause-specific survival could be used as an alternative for relative survival. Methods We used data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program for 2 330 905 cancer patients from January 1, 1992, through December 31, 2004. We defined cancer-specific deaths according to the following variables: cause of death, only one tumor or the first of multiple tumors, site of the original cancer diagnosis, and comorbidities. Estimates of relative survival and cause-specific survival that were derived by use of an actuarial method were compared. Results Among breast cancer patients who were white, black, or of Asian or Pacific Islander descent and who were older than 65 years, estimates of 5-year relative survival (107.5%, 106.6%, and 103.0%, respectively) were higher than estimates of 5-year cause-specific survival (98.6%, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 98.4% to 98.8%; 97.4%, 95% CI = 96.2% to 98.2%; and 99.2%, 95% CI = 98.4%, 99.6%, respectively). Relative survival methods likely underestimated rates for cancers of the oral cavity and pharynx (eg, for white cancer patients aged ≥65 years, relative survival = 54.2%, 95% CI = 53.1% to 55.3%, and cause-specific survival = 60.1%, 95% CI = 59.1% to 60.9%) and the lung and bronchus (eg, for black cancer patients aged ≥65 years, relative survival = 10.5%, 95% CI = 9.9% to 11.2%, and cause-specific survival = 11.9%, 95% CI = 11.2 % to 12.6%), largely because of mismatches between the population with these diseases and the population used to derive the life table. Socioeconomic differences between groups with low and high status in relative survival estimates appeared to be inflated (eg, corpus and uterus socioeconomic status gradient was 13.3% by relative survival methods and 8.8% by cause-specific survival methods). Conclusion Although accuracy of the cause of death on a death certificate can be problematic for cause-specific survival estimates, cause-specific survival methods may be an alternative to relative survival methods when suitable life tables are not available.
  Breast cancer is one of the most frequent of human malignacies, and it is therefore fundamental to identify the underlying molecular mechanisms leading to cancer transformation. Among other causative agents in the development of breast cancers, an important role for reactive oxygen species (ROS) has emerged. However, most studies on the role of ROS in cancer have not reached specific conclusions, and many issues remain controversial. In the present study, we show that methionine sulfoxide reductase A (MsrA), which is known to protect proteins from oxidation and which acts as a ROS scavenger, is down-regulated in a number of breast cancers. Moreover, levels of MsrA correlate with advanced tumor grade. We therefore investigated the functional role of MsrA in breast cancer cells. Our data show that reduction of MsrA levels results in increased cell proliferation and extracellular matrix degradation, and consequently in a more aggressive cellular phenotype, both in vivo and in vitro. We also show that the underlying molecular mechanisms involve increased ROS levels, resulting in reduction of phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome ten protein (PTEN), and activation of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathway. In addition, MsrA down-regulation results in up-regulation of VEGF, providing additional support for tumor growth in vivo.
  The cell-fate determination factor Dachshund was cloned as a dominant inhibitor of the hyperactive epidermal growth factor (EGFR) ellipse. The expression of Dachshund is lost in human breast cancer associated with poor prognosis. Breast tumor initiating cells (BTIC) may contribute to tumor progression and therapy resistance. Herein endogenous DACH1 was reduced in breast cancer cell llines with high expression of TIC markers and in patient samples of the basal phenotype. Re-expression of DACH1 blocked breast tumor cell growth in vivo, reduced mammosphere formation and reduced the proportion of CD24low/CD44high breast tumor cells. Conversely, lentiviral shRNA to DACH1 increased the BTIC population. Genome wide expression studies of mammary tumors demonstrated DACH1 repressed a molecular signature associated with stem cells (SOX2, Nanog, KLF4) and genomic wide ChIP-seq analysis identified DACH1 binding to the promoter of the Nanog, KLF4, and Lin28 genes. KLF4/c-Myc and Oct4/Sox2 antagonized DACH1 repression of BTIC. Mechanistic studies demonstrated DACH1 directly repressed the Nanog and Sox2 promoters via a conserved domain. Endogenous DACH1 regulates BTIC in vitro and in vivo.
  Caspase activation is a hallmark of apoptosis. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the regulation of caspase-8 activation within the extrinsic death pathway are not well understood. In this study, we demonstrate that procaspase-8 is phosphorylated in mitotic cells by Cdk1/cyclin B1 on Ser-387, which is located at the N-terminus of the catalytic subunit p10. This phosphorylation of procaspase-8 on Ser-387 occurs in cancer cell lines as well as in primary breast tissues and lymphocytes. Furthermore, RNAi-mediated silencing of cyclin B1 or treatment with the Cdk1 inhibitor RO-3306 enhances the Fas-mediated activation and processing of procaspase-8 in mitotic cells. A non-phosphorylatable procaspase-8(S387A) facilitates Fas-induced apoptosis during mitosis. Our findings suggest that Cdk1/cyclin B1 activity shields human cells against extrinsic death stimuli and unravel the molecular details of the crosstalk between cell cycle and extrinsic apoptotic pathways. Finally, this new mechanism may also contribute to tumorigenesis.
  Resent studies have identified Pygopus as a core component of the β-catenin/T-cell factor (TCF)/lymphoid-enhancing factor 1 (LEF) transcriptional activation complex required for the expression of canonical Wg/Wnt target genes in Drosophila. However, the biochemical involvement of mammalian Pygopus proteins in β-catenin/TCF/LEF gene activation remains controversial. In this study, we perform a series of molecular/biochemical experiments to demonstrate that Pygo2 associates with histone modifying enzymatic complexes, specifically the MLL2 histone methytransferase (HMT) and STAGA histone acetyltransferase (HAT) complexes, to facilitate their interaction with β-catenin and to augment Wnt1-induced, TCF/LEF-dependent transcriptional activation in breast cancer cells. We identify a critical domain in Pygo2 encompassing the first 47 amino acids that mediates its HMT/HAT interaction. We further demonstrate the importance of this domain in Pygo2's ability to transcriptionally activate both artificial and endogenous Wnt target genes, and to expand breast cancer stem-like cells in culture. This work now links mechanistically Pygo2's role in histone modification to its enhancement of the Wnt-dependent transcriptional program and cancer stem-like cell expansion.
  The actin cross-linking protein filamin A (FLNa) functions as a scaffolding protein and couples cell cytoskeleton to extracellular matrix and integrin receptor signaling. In this study, we report that FLNa suppresses invasion of breast cancer cells and regulates focal adhesion (FA) turnover. Two large progression tissue microarrays from breast cancer patients revealed a significant decrease of FLNa levels in tissues from invasive breast cancer compared with benign disease and in lymph node-positive compared with lymph node-negative breast cancer. In breast cancer cells and orthotopic mouse breast cancer models, down-regulation of FLNa stimulated cancer cell migration, invasion, and metastasis formation. Time-lapse microscopy and biochemical assays after FLNa silencing and rescue with wild-type or mutant protein resistant to calpain cleavage revealed that FLNa regulates FA disassembly at the leading edge of motile cells. Moreover, FLNa down-regulation enhanced calpain activity through the mitogen-activated protein kinase-extracellular signal-regulated kinase cascade and stimulated the cleavage of FA proteins. These results document a regulation of FA dynamics by FLNa in breast cancer cells.
  Background: Tumors with homologous recombination deficiency (HRD), such as BRCA1-associated breast cancers, are not able to reliably repair DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) and are therefore highly sensitive to both DSB-inducing chemotherapy and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors. We have studied markers that may indicate the presence of HRD in HER2-negative breast cancers and related them to neoadjuvant chemotherapy response. Patients and methods: Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), BRCA1 promoter methylation, BRCA1 messenger RNA (mRNA) expression and EMSY amplification were assessed in 163 HER2-negative pretreatment biopsies from patients scheduled for neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Results: Features of BRCA1 dysfunction were frequent in triple-negative (TN) tumors: a BRCA1-like aCGH pattern, promoter methylation and reduced mRNA expression were observed in, respectively, 57%, 25% and 36% of the TN tumors. In ER+ tumors, a BRCA2-like aCGH pattern and the amplification of the BRCA2 inhibiting gene EMSY were frequently observed (43% and 13%, respectively) and this BRCA2-like profile was associated with a better response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Conclusions: Abnormalities associated with BRCA1 inactivation are present in about half of the TN breast cancers but were not predictive of chemotherapy response. In ER+/HER2- tumors, a BRCA2-like aCGH pattern was predictive of chemotherapy response. These findings should be confirmed in independent series.
  The authors prospectively examined the relation of fruit and vegetable intake to breast cancer risk among 51,928 women aged 21-69 years at enrollment in 1995 in the Black Women's Health Study. Dietary intake was assessed by using a validated food frequency questionnaire. Cox proportional hazards models were used to estimate incidence rate ratios and 95% confidence intervals, adjusted for breast cancer risk factors. During 12 years of follow-up, there were 1,268 incident cases of breast cancer. Total fruit, total vegetable, and total fruit and vegetable intakes were not significantly associated with overall risk of breast cancer. However, total vegetable consumption was associated with a decreased risk of estrogen receptor-negative/progesterone receptor-negative breast cancer (incidence rate ratio = 0.57, 95% confidence interval: 0.38, 0.85, for ≥2 servings/day relative to <4/week; P(trend) = 0.02). In addition, there was some evidence of inverse associations with breast cancer risk overall for cruciferous vegetable intake (P(trend) = 0.06) and for carrot intake (P(trend) = 0.02). Study findings suggest that frequent consumption of vegetables is inversely associated with risk of estrogen receptor-negative/progesterone receptor-negative breast cancer, and that specific vegetables may be associated with a decreased risk of breast cancer overall.
  Multiple-day diet records can be unsuitable for cohort studies because of high administrative and analytical costs. Costs could be reduced if a subsample of participants were analyzed in a nested case-control study. However, completed records are usually reviewed ("documented") with participants to correct errors and omissions before analysis. The authors evaluated the suitability of using undocumented 3-day food records in 2 samples of women in a Northern California cohort study of breast cancer survivorship (2006-2009). One group of participants (n = 130) received an introduction to the food record at enrollment, while another (n = 70) received more comprehensive instruction. Food records were mailed to participants 6 months later for follow-up and were analyzed as received and after phone documentation. Error rates for adequate completion were high in the first group but substantially lower among persons receiving instruction; prevalences of missing data on serving size and incomplete food descriptions changed from 30% to 4% and from 32% to 6%, respectively (P < 0.0001). Correlations between nutrient intakes calculated from undocumented and documented records were 0.72-0.93 in the first group and were significantly stronger (0.84-0.99) among persons receiving instruction. Documentation had little effect on intraclass correlation coefficients across days, but training increased the coefficients for many nutrients. When participants receive proper instruction, undocumented food records can be satisfactory for large epidemiologic studies.
  Maytansine and its analogues (maytansinoids) are potent microtubule-targeted compounds that inhibit proliferation of cells at mitosis. Antibody-maytansinoid conjugates consisting of maytansinoids (DM1 and DM4) attached to tumor-specific antibodies have shown promising clinical results. To determine the mechanism by which the antibody-DM1 conjugates inhibit cell proliferation, we examined the effects of the cleavable anti-EpCAM-SPP-DM1 and uncleavable anti-EpCAM-SMCC-DM1 conjugates on MCF7 human breast tumor cells. We also examined the effects of the free maytansinoids, maytansine and S-methyl DM1 (a version of DM1 that is stable in cell culture medium), for comparison. Both the conjugates and free maytansinoids potently inhibited MCF7 cell proliferation at nanomolar and subnanomolar concentrations, respectively, by arresting the cells in mitotic prometaphase/metaphase. Arrest occurred in concert with the internalization and intracellular processing of both conjugates under conditions that induced abnormal spindle organization and suppressed microtubule dynamic instability. Microtubule depolymerization occurred only at significantly higher drug concentrations. The results indicate that free maytansinoids, antibody-maytansinoid conjugates, and their metabolites exert their potent antimitotic effects through a common mechanism involving suppression of microtubule dynamic instability. Mol Cancer Ther; 9(10); 2700-13. ©2010 AACR.
  The role of infectious agents and chronic inflammation in carcinogenesis is being increasingly recognized. It has been estimated that about 18% of cancers are directly linked to infections, particularly gastric adenocarcinoma (Helicobacter pylori), cervical carcinoma (human papilloma viruses), and hepatocarcinoma (hepatitis B and C viruses). Multiple clinical trials of COX-2 inhibitors and other antiinflammatory agents have shown a beneficial effect on the development of diverse tumors, such as those of the colon, stomach, prostate, and breast. However, their mechanism of action is not completely understood and may differ among the infectious agents and tumor types. Because gastric adenocarcinomas account for more than 90% of all gastric malignancies, this review focuses on adenocarcinomas.
  Angiopoietin-1 (Ang-1) is a ligand for Tie-2 receptors and a promoter of angiogenesis. Angiogenesis plays an important role in breast cancer, as it is one of the critical events required for tumors to grow and metastasize. In this study, we investigated the influence of estradiol (E2) on the expression of angiopoietins in breast cancer cell lines. Ang-1 mRNA and protein expressions were significantly higher in estrogen receptor-negative (ERα-) breast cancer cells than in estrogen receptor-positive (ERα+) cells. Exposure of ERα+ cells to E2 resulted in further reductions of Ang-1 levels. In mouse mammary pads inoculated with breast cancer cells, both tumor size and Ang-1 production were significantly lower in ERα+ cell-derived xenografts, as compared to those derived from ERα- cells. Reduction of circulating levels of E2 by ovariectomy eliminated this response. Overall, these results indicate that Ang-1 mRNA and protein expressions: 1) negatively correlate with the level of ERα in breast cancer cell lines; 2) are downregulated by E2 in an ERα dependent manner; and 3) positively correlate with the degree of angiogenesis in-vivo. We conclude that Ang-1 is an important modulator of growth and progression of ERα- breast cancers.
  Tamoxifen is an antiestrogenic agent used widely in the treatment of estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer. However, hepatic steatosis has been reported during clinical trials of tamoxifen. To explore the mechanism responsible for this tamoxifen-induced hepatic steatosis, we used microarray analysis to profile the gene expression pattern of mouse liver after tamoxifen treatment. Tamoxifen was administered orally as a single dose of 10mg/kg (low dose), 50mg/kg (medium dose), or 100mg/kg (high dose) to C57BL/6 mice, and the livers were removed 2h, 4h, 8h, and 24h later. From microarray data obtained from the liver samples, 414 genes were selected as tamoxifen-responsive genes (P<0.05, two-way ANOVA; cutoff ≥ 1.5-fold response). These genes were classified into three groups: 308 of the 414 genes showed a time-dependent response, nine genes showed a dose-dependent response, and 97 genes showed a time- and dose-dependent response. Most of the 308 time-dependent-responsive genes were associated predominantly with the biological processes involved in lipid metabolism. Overrepresented transcription factor binding site analysis showed that the following nuclear receptors that are important in lipid and carbohydrate metabolism were overrepresented: the androgen receptor (AR), nuclear receptor subfamily 2 group F member 1 (NR2F1), hepatocyte nuclear factor 4α (HNF4α), and retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor alpha 1 (RORα1). Reporter gene analysis further revealed that tamoxifen repressed the 5α-dihydrotestosterone-induced activation of the AR and the intrinsic transactivation function of RORα1, HNF4α, and NR2F1. Taken together, these data provide a better understanding of the molecular mechanism underlying tamoxifen-induced steatogenic hepatotoxicity and useful information for predicting steatogenic hepatotoxicity.
  AIM: To isolate novel breast cancer antigen for developing cancer marker and vaccine, a phage display peptide library was screened with serum antibody from breast cancer patients. METHODS: A phage display peptide library was screened with serum IgG from six breast cancer patients, and then identified the positive clones by ELISA. According to the sequences of the positive clones, the synthesized oligonucleotides of one small peptide (P15) was cloned into PGEX-4T-1. Finally the fusion protein (GST-P15), which was purified from E.coli. BL21, was checked its binding activity with two kinds of serum antibodies (20 breast cancer patients and 20 normal people) by ELISA. RESULTS: 38 positive clones which specifically bound with serum IgG from breast cancer patients were screened. Some of these clones had the same DNA sequence. A small peptide (P15) and purified its fusion protein (GST-P15) was obtained successfully. ELISA assay showed GST-P15 had higher affinity with the serum antibody from breast cancer patients than with the normal serum and there was a significant difference (P<0.01). CONCLUSION: The peptide P15 can be recognized specifically by serum antibody from the breast cancer patients and they will be helpful for isolate new cancer antigen from breast cancer.
  INTRODUCTION Knowledge and understanding of disease can influence time to presentation and potentially, therefore, cancer survival rates. The media is one of the most important sources of public health information and it influences the awareness and perception of cancer. It is not known if the reportage of cancer by the media is representative to the true incidence of disease.MATERIALS AND METHODS The top 10 UK daily newspapers were assessed over a 1-year period for the 10 most common UK cancers via their on-line search facilities. RESULTS Of the 5832 articles identified, there was marked over-representation of breast, kidney and stomach cancer with ratios of prevalence to reporting of 1.4, 1.9 and 3.2 to 1, respectively. Colorectal, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, bladder and oesophageal cancers are all markedly under-represented with ratios of 0.4, 0.2, 0.6 and 0.4 to 1, respectively. CONCLUSIONS A policy of media advocacy by health professionals could enhance the information provided by the media and thus reflect the true extent of disease. A partnership between health professionals and journalists could result in articles that are relevant to the population, informative and in a style and format that is easily comprehendible. Targeted public health information could highlight the 'red-flag' symptoms and break down any stigma associated with cancer. This enhanced awareness could improve the health-seeking behaviour of the general population and reduce the delay from symptoms to diagnosis.
  BACKGROUND: Claudin-1 is a membrane protein of tight junctions, and is associated with the development of various cancers. However, the significance of claudin-1 expression in cancer cells is not well understood. Here, we showed for the first time the anti-apoptotic effect of claudin-1 in human breast cancer MCF-7 cells. METHODS: Human breast cancer MCF-7 and T47D cells were treated with or without tamoxifen, siRNA against claudin-1, or tamoxifen and claudin-1 siRNA. The samples were analyzed by RT-PCR, Western blotting or immunofluorescent staining. RESULTS: The expression of claudin-1 was upregulated in tamoxifen-treated MCF-7 cells, whereas the expression of claudin-1 was not altered in tamoxifen-treated T47D cells. Knockdown of claudin-1 by siRNA increased the amount of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) regardless of tamoxifen treatment in MCF-7 cells, but not T47D cells. In the cell membranes of the MCF-7 cells, tamoxifen treatment increased the amount of claudin-1, but decreased the amount of beta-catenin. Claudin-1 siRNA increased the amount of E-cadherin in the cytoplasm of the MCF-7 cells as well as the amount of beta-catenin in their cell membranes. CONCLUSION: These results indicate that claudin-1 has anti-apoptotic effects, and is involved in the regulation of the expression and subcellular localization of beta-catenin and E-cadherin in MCF-7, but not T47D cells.
  BACKGROUND: Correlation between circulating sex steroid levels and breast cancer has been controversial, with measurement of free, or bioavailable hormone rarely available. Salivary hormone levels represent the bioavailable fraction. To further elucidate the role of endogenous hormones in breast cancer, we aimed to assess correlation between salivary sex steroid levels and breast cancer prevalence. METHODS: Salivary hormone levels of testosterone (T), Estradiol (E2), Progesterone (P), Estriol (E3), Estrone (E1), DHEAS and Cortisol (C) were measured by Enzyme Immunoassay (EIA) in 357 women with histologically verified breast cancer and 184 age-matched control women. RESULTS: Salivary T and DHEAS levels were significantly lower in breast cancer cases vs. controls (27.2+13.9 vs. 32.2+17.5 pg/ml, p<0.001 for T and 5.3+4.3 vs. 6.4+4.5 ng/ml, p=0.007 for DHEAS). E2 and E1 levels were elevated and E3 levels were lowered in cases vs. controls. CONCLUSIONS: Salivary T levels, representing the bioavailable hormone, are significantly lower in women with breast cancer compared to age-matched control women. These findings support the protective role of biovailable testosterone in counteracting the proliferative effects of estrogens on mammary tissue.
  Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) constitute the most rapidly growing class of human therapeutics and the second largest class of drugs after vaccines. The treatment of B-cell malignancies and HER2/Neu(+) breast cancer has benefited considerably from the use of therapeutic mAbs, either alone or in combination with standard chemotherapy. Frequent relapses, however, demonstrate that the bioactivity of these mAbs is still suboptimal. The concept of improving the anti-tumor activity of mAbs is well established and potentiating the cytotoxicity induced by anticancer mAbs can be achieved by strategies that target the downstream cytolytic effector cells. The recruitment of Fcγ receptor-dependent functions appears well suited in this regard, because several lines of evidence suggest that enhancing antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) induced by therapeutic mAbs may directly improve their clinical efficacy. The cytolytic effector cells involved in ADCC are FcγR-expressing natural killer (NK) cells, but also γδ T cells can be amplified and finetuned for stronger ADCC activity. γδ T cells are raising a considerable interest in the immunotherapy community given their intrinsic antitumor activity that can be boosted by stimulation with synthetic phosphoantigens (PAgs), or with drugs that cause their accumulation into target cells, like aminobisphosphonates (N-BPs), and low doses interleukin (IL)-2. The field is interesting, and several papers have already explored this approach in solid and haematological malignancies. Thus, we propose that enhancing the efficacy of mAbs by combination with γδ T cell activation may have considerable therapeutic potential for a variety of malignancies, most especially for patients whose FcγR alleles impair ADCC.
  Calcitriol, the hormonally active form of vitamin D, is being evaluated in clinical trials as an anti-cancer agent. Calcitriol exerts multiple antiproliferative, proapoptotic, and pro-differentiating actions on various malignant cells and retards tumor growth in animal models of cancer. Calcitriol also exhibits several anti-inflammatory effects including suppression of prostaglandin (PG) action, inhibition of p38 stress kinase signaling, and the subsequent production of proinflammatory cytokines and inhibition of NF-&#x03BA;B signaling. Calcitriol also decreases the expression of aromatase, the enzyme that catalyzes estrogen synthesis in breast cancer, both by a direct transcriptional repression and indirectly by reducing PGs, which are major stimulators of aromatase transcription. Other important effects include the suppression of tumor angiogenesis, invasion, and metastasis. These calcitriol actions provide a basis for its potential use in cancer therapy and chemoprevention. We summarize the status of trials involving calcitriol and its analogs, used alone or in combination with known anti-cancer agents. Expected final online publication date for the Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology Volume 51 is January 06, 2011. Please see http://www.annualreviews.org/catalog/pubdates.aspx for revised estimates.
  Using a mild pressure stressing device and a pulsed ruby-laser system, we apply phase-shifted holographic interferometry to the detection of breast cancer. We compare a four-step algorithm and a Carré algorithm for their ability to evaluate the interferograms. The results show the feasibility of holographic interferometry in the detection of anomalies in the human female breast.
  AIMS AND OBJECTIVES: To explore the experiences of 12 women with breast cancer, involved in a large longitudinal qualitative study designed to explore the experiences of people with cancer within the first year following diagnosis. BACKGROUND: To understand experiences of breast cancer further as a chronic illness, this study draws on biographically informed and embodied perspectives of chronic illness. DESIGN: Qualitative, longitudinal study. METHOD: Interviews were conducted at three time-points within the first year following diagnosis with 12 women with breast cancer. Drawing on the constant comparative method, a descriptive and thematic approach to data analysis was adopted. To move beyond the descriptive level, we drew on the concepts of biographical disruption and embodiment to further explore and explain the disruption that was evident in these women’s lives as a result of their diagnosis. RESULTS: Two key concepts emerged from the data: ‘Identity Transition: moving between health and illness’ and ‘Making the Transition to the Future? Living with breast cancer and moving on’. Identity transition emerged as a result of the changes and adaptations participants were required to make as a result of their diagnosis. Making the transition to the future emerged as a result of the challenges these women faced living with cancer. CONCLUSIONS: This study showed that the longitudinal exploration of the experiences of cancer within the first year following diagnosis provides a vital understanding of the impact cancer can have on one’s identity from the moment of diagnosis onwards. RELEVANCE TO CLINICAL PRACTICE: This study has implications for cancer services because it highlights the need for interventions that support people to both successfully manage the experience of cancer diagnosis and treatment and equip themselves with the necessary techniques to negotiate transitions towards the future and living with cancer.
  We compared mitogenicity and intracellular signalling by human insulin and the AspB10 (X-10) human insulin analogue in MCF-7 human mammary adenocarcinoma cells. By flow analysis of phosphorylated histone H3 or cell cycle distributions, insulin and X-10 were mitogenic at physiologically relevant concentrations (2 nm to 74 pm range), with X-10 being approximately 3-fold more mitogenic than insulin. By western blotting with phospho-specific antibodies, insulin induced phosphorylation of IRS-1, Akt, p70S6K, S6 ribosomal protein, 4E-BP1, FoxO3a, FoxO1, p44/42 MAPK and the EGFR. Blocking with wortmannin, rapamycin and U0126 showed that these signalling events conformed to the canonical PI3K pathway. IRS-1 (Ser302) phosphorylation was abolished by wortmannin and rapamycin, suggesting a feedback from the PI3K pathway on insulin signalling. Compared with equimolar insulin, X-10 caused up to 2-fold higher phosphorylation of all proteins examined in this study. The phosphorylation sites that responded most strongly to insulin were not generally the same as those responding most strongly to X-10. In the PI3K pathway, the most X-10-sensitive protein localized to the translation-regulating arm (p70S6K), with FoxO3a and FoxO1 transcription factors showing a more comparable response to insulin and X-10. Using flow analysis, we confirmed the correlation between insulin-triggered translational activation in G0/G1 (S6 phosphorylation) and S-phase entry by MCF-7 cells. In summary, our findings implicate asymmetrical PI3K pathway activation and specifically stimulation of protein translation in the hypermitogenic effect of insulin analogues such as X-10. It remains to be shown whether these findings are relevant to other human mammary cancer cell types. Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
  This study investigated the association between supportive and collaborative processes and dyadic adjustment in 94 women at increased risk of breast/ovarian cancer and their partners. Participants were recruited through two familial cancer clinics. They completed mailed, self-report questionnaires that included measures of psychological distress, dyadic adjustment (consensus, cohesion and satisfaction) and couple predictor variables (perceived support and team approach). Most couples reported average-to-high levels of consensus, cohesion and satisfaction, with a small proportion of couples (6.4%) reporting scores that reached clinically significant levels of dyadic distress. Greater perceived support was associated with better dyadic consensus and satisfaction, and dyadic cohesion and satisfaction were higher among couples who reported greater use of a team approach. General distress did not moderate the association between dyadic coping and relationship quality. There were no significant relationships between intra-couple congruence on support or team approach, and dyadic adjustment. Most couples had a functional relationship in the face of the current health stressor, although a subgroup may be at elevated risk of negative psychological consequences, including further relationship strain. The results highlight that dyadic coping strategies are important factors involved in the quality of couples' relationship following genetic counselling for breast/ovarian cancer risk.
  The ATP-binding cassette transporter breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP/ABCG2) is supposed to be a major determinant of the multidrug resistance phenotype of tumors by extruding chemically diverse cytostatic drugs out of tumor cells. BCRP physically and possibly also functionally interacts with caveolin-1 (CAV1, encoded by Cav1), an integral membrane protein of lipid rafts important for signal transduction and membrane trafficking. Moreover, Cav1 is linked to an aggressive phenotype of cancer cells in various tumors. We therefore investigated whether Cav1 plays a functional role in the regulation of BCRP transport activity and in the resistance against chemotherapeutics that are BCRP substrates. As a cell model, we used the BCRP overexpressing cell line MDCKII-BCRP and the corresponding parental cell line MDCKII as a control. Cav1 expression was down-regulated using retrovirus-mediated RNA interference technology. BCRP activity was assessed by pheophorbide A efflux assay and the resistance towards cytostatic drugs was measured by proliferation assays. Efficient knockdown of Cav1 reduced Cav1 expression by 85-95% and BCRP activity by 35%. Concurrently, it reduced resistance towards the BCRP substrate mitoxantrone but not towards vincristine, a chemotherapeutic that is not extruded by BCRP. Western blot analysis of gradient ultracentrifugation fractions and immunofluorescence demonstrates that BCRP localization within the plasma membrane was largely unaltered in Cav1-deficient cells compared to controls. The diminished BCRP function after Cav1 knockdown is, thus, likely mediated by alterations in protein-protein interactions and suggests a positive regulation of BCRP function by CAV1.
  INTRODUCTION: We examined race/ethnic differences in treatment-related job loss and the financial impact of treatment-related job loss, in a population-based sample of women diagnosed with breast cancer. METHODS: Three thousand two hundred fifty two women with non-metastatic breast cancer diagnosed (August 2005-February 2007) within the Los Angeles County and Detroit Metropolitan Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results registries, were identified and asked to complete a survey (mean time from diagnosis = 8.9 months). Latina and African American women were over-sampled (n = 2268, eligible response rate 72.1%). RESULTS: One thousand one hundred eleven women (69.6%) of working age (<65 years) were working for pay at time of diagnosis. Of these women, 10.4% (24.1% Latina, 10.1% African American, 6.9% White, p < 0.001) reported that they lost or quit their job since diagnosis due to breast cancer or its treatment (defined as job loss). Latina women were more likely to experience job loss compared to White women (OR = 2.0, p = 0.013)), independent of sociodemographic factors. There were no significant differences in job loss between African American and White women, independent of sociodemographic factors. Additional adjustments for clinical and treatment factors revealed a significant interaction between race/ethnicity and chemotherapy (p = 0.007). Among women who received chemotherapy, Latina women were more likely to lose their job compared to White women (OR = 3.2, p < 0.001), however, there were no significant differences between Latina and White women among those who did not receive chemotherapy. Women who lost their job were more likely to experience financial strain (e.g. difficulty paying bills 27% vs. 11%, p < 0.001). CONCLUSION: Job loss is a serious consequence of treatment for women with breast cancer. Clinicians and staff need to be aware of aspects of treatment course that place women at higher risk for job loss, especially ethnic minorities receiving chemotherapy.
  Complete axillary lymph node dissection has been the traditional operation to determine whether cancer has spread beyond the breast. In the large majority of patients with breast cancer, lymphatic mapping and γ-probe-guided and/or blue dye sentinel node biopsy can be used to locate the first node in the axilla, and thereby provide important information about the status of axillary nodes. Patients without clinical involvement of the axilla should undergo sentinel node biopsy routinely. Thus, they may be spared complete axillary dissection if the sentinel node is negative. Decreased arm swelling and pain are associated with sentinel lymph node biopsy compared with axillary lymph node dissection.
  The human homolog of the Drosophila Scribble (SCRIB) tumor suppressor gene encodes a protein that regulates apical-basolateral polarity in mammalian epithelia and controls cell proliferation. Due to the role of cell polarity proteins in human cancers, we investigated whether genetic variability in SCRIB impacts breast carcinogenesis and tumor pathology. Five genetic variants were analyzed for an association with breast cancer risk and histopathological tumor parameters using a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) tagging approach. Genotyping of five tag SNPs was performed by TaqMan(®) allelic discrimination and RFLP-based PCR using the GENICA population-based breast cancer case-control collection including 1,021 cases and 1,015 age-matched controls. Odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated by ordinal logistic regression. None of the tag SNPs was associated with breast cancer risk or tumor characteristics. Our findings suggest that genetic variability in the SCRIB polarity gene does not contribute to breast cancer development.
  Lapatinib and capecitabine combination therapy is effective in trastuzumab-resistant human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-positive breast cancer. We investigated the biomarkers from serum of patients receiving lapatinib and capecitabine Patients received lapatinib 1,250 mg once daily and capecitabine 2,000 mg/m(2)/day, day 1-14, every 3 weeks. Serum samples were obtained before treatment initiation. Levels of transforming growth factor-α (TGF-α), epidermal growth factor (EGF), extracellular domains of EGFR and HER2 were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The effect of TGF-α on in vitro sensitivity of SK-BR-3 cells to lapatinib was investigated. Sixty-four patients were included. Response rate was significantly higher in patients with low serum TGF-α (≤3.75 pg/ml) compared to high TGF-α (>3.75 pg/ml) [61.1% (11/18) vs. 17.4% (8/46), respectively; P = 0.001]. Low serum TGF-α was independently associated with better response in multivariate analysis [adjusted odds ratio, 8.96; 95% confidence interval (CI) 2.4-34.2]. Time-to-progression tended to be shorter in patients with high serum TGF-α compared to low TGF-α [median 3.8 months (95% CI 2.3-5.4) vs. 6.5 (95% CI 6.1-6.8), respectively; P = 0.067]. We confirmed that TGF-α diminished the sensitivity of SK-BR3-cells to lapatinib in vitro. The in vitro antiproliferative effect of cetuximab in combination with lapatinib was higher than that of lapatinib alone in SK-BR3-cells exposed to TGF-α. These data suggest that TGF-α plays a role in resistance to lapatinib and capecitabine therapy among HER2-positive breast cancer.
  The outlook for metastatic melanoma to the brain is dismal. New therapeutic avenues are therefore needed. The anti-metastatic mechanisms that may underpin the effects of low molecular weight heparins (LMWHs) in in vitro and preclinical melanoma models warrant translating to a clinical setting. This review outlines a rationale that supports our proposal that metastatic melanoma to the brain is a clinical setting in which to study the anti-metastatic potential of LMWHs. Prevention or delay of brain metastases in melanoma is a clinically relevant and measurable target. Studies to explore the effect of anticoagulants on cancer survival are underway in other malignancies such as lung, pancreas, ovary, breast, and stomach cancer. However, no study to our knowledge has a methodology that could produce clinical evidence in support of a mechanism for whatever benefit may be seen. The setting we propose would allow translation of the molecular knowledge of the metastatic pathways mediated by platelets and the selectins-all potential targets of heparin-in a "time to appearance" of brain metastases endpoint. Since brain metastases are so common and they have a singularly adverse impact on survival, the "biological neuroprotection" model we propose in metastatic melanoma could provide the translational evidence to support the benefit of LMWHs in melanoma. More significantly, this would open the door to a wider "anti-metastatic" approach that could have much greater impact in patients with minimal disease being treated in adjuvant settings for the more common malignancies such as breast and colon cancer.
  BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to evaluate the need of axillary staging in breast cancer patients showing exclusive lymphatic drainage to the internal mammary chain (IMC). METHODS: A total of 2203 patients treated for breast carcinoma in three participating hospitals between July 2001 and July 2008 were analyzed. Only patients showing drainage to the IMC on preoperative lymphoscintigraphy were included. The number of harvested IMC sentinel lymph nodes (SLNs), axillary SLNs, and metastases were recorded. Finally, the follow-up of this group of patients was analyzed. RESULTS: In 25/426 patients, drainage was exclusively to the IMC. Exploration of the axilla resulted in the harvesting of blue SLNs in 9 patients (36%) and the retrieval of an enlarged lymph node in 1 patient. In 4 of the remaining 15 patients, an axillary lymph node dissection (ALND) was done. Lymph node metastases were found in 3 patients who had blue axillary SLNs and in 1 patient who underwent ALND. In the 11 patients who had no blue SLNs and no ALND, no axillary recurrences were observed during follow-up (median = 26 months). CONCLUSIONS: Proper staging of the axilla remains crucial in patients showing exclusive drainage to the IMC. When no axillary node can be retrieved, ALND remains subject to discussion.
  Interaction of nanoparticles with human cells is an interesting topic for understanding toxicity and developing potential drug candidates. Water soluble platinum nanoparticles were synthesized via reduction of hexachloroplatinic acid using sodium borohydride in the presence of capping agents. The bioactivity of folic acid and poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) capped platinum nanoparticles (Pt-nps) has been investigated using commercially available cell lines. In the cell viability experiments, PVP-capped nanoparticles were found to be less toxic (>80% viability), whereas, folic acid-capped platinum nanoparticles showed a reduced viability down to 24% after 72 h of exposure at a concentration of 100 μg ml(-1) for MCF7 breast cancer cells. Such toxicity, combined with the possibility to incorporate functional organic molecules as capping agents, can be used for developing new drug candidates.
  Breast cancer is a growing concern in low- and middle-income countries (LMCs). We explore community health worker (CHW) programs and describe their potential use in LMCs. We use South Africa as an example of how CHWs could improve access to breast health care because of its middle-income status, existing cancer centers, and history of CHW programs. CHWs could assume three main roles along the cancer control continuum: health education, screening, and patient navigation. By raising awareness about breast cancer through education, women are more likely to undergo screening. Many more women can be screened resulting in earlier-stage disease if CHWs are trained to perform clinical breast exams. As patient navigators, CHWs can guide women through the screening and treatment process. It is suggested that these roles be combined within existing CHW programs to maximize resources and improve breast cancer outcomes in LMCs.
  It is prevailingly thought that estrogen signaling is not involved in development of estrogen receptor (ER)-negative breast cancer. However, there is evidence indicating that ovariectomy prevents the development of both ER-positive and -negative breast cancer, suggesting that estrogen signaling is involved in the development of ER-negative breast cancer. Previously, our laboratory cloned a variant of ER-α, ER-α36, and found that ER-α36 mediated nongenomic estrogen signaling and is highly expressed in ER-negative breast cancer cells. In this study, we found that ER-α36 was highly expressed in 10/12 cases of triple-negative breast cancer. We investigated the role of mitogenic estrogen signaling mediated by ER-α36 in malignant growth of triple-negative breast cancer MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-436 cells that express high levels of ER-α36 and found that these cells strongly responded to mitogenic estrogen signaling both in vitro and in vivo. Knockdown of ER-α36 expression in these cells using the small hairpin RNA method diminished their responsiveness to estrogen. ER-α36 physically interacted with the EGFR/Src/Shc complex and mediated estrogen-induced phosphorylation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and Src. EGFR signaling activated ER-α36 transcription through an AP1 site in the ER-α36 promoter, and ER-α36 expression was able to stabilize EGFR protein. Our results, thus demonstrated that ER-α36 mediates nongenomic estrogen signaling through the EGFR/Src/ERK signaling pathway in ER-negative breast cancer cells and suggested that a subset of ER-negative breast tumors that expresses ER-α36, retains responsiveness to mitogenic estrogen signaling.Oncogene advance online publication, 11 October 2010; doi:10.1038/onc.2010.458.
  Breast cancer metastasis suppressor 1 (BRMS1) has been reported to suppress metastasis without significantly affecting tumorigenicity in breast cancer and ovarian cancer. To investigate the role of BRMS1 in human melanoma progression and prognosis, we established tissue microarray and BRMS1 expression was evaluated by immunohistochemistry in 41 dysplastic nevi, 90 primary melanomas and 47 melanoma metastases. We found that BRMS1 expression was significantly decreased in metastatic melanoma compared with primary melanoma or dysplastic nevi (P=0.021 and 0.001, respectively, χ(2) test). In addition, reduced BRMS1 staining was significantly correlated with American Joint Committee on Cancer stages (P=0.011, χ(2) test), but not associated with tumor thickness, tumor ulceration and other clinicopathological parameters. Furthermore, BRMS1 expression was significantly correlated with disease-specific 5-year survival of melanoma patients (P=0.007, log-rank test). Multivariate Cox regression analysis revealed that BRMS1 staining was an independent prognostic factor for melanoma patients (relative risk=0.51; confidence interval=0.29-0.91; P=0.022). Moreover, we demonstrated that BRMS1 overexpression inhibited endothelial cell growth and tube formation ability by suppressing NF-κB activity and IL-6 expression in vitro. We also showed that knockdown of BRMS1 increased IL-6 expression and promoted endothelial cell growth and tube formation. In addition, our data revealed that the BRMS1-mediated IL-6 expression is dependent on NF-κB. Strikingly, our in vivo studies using nude mice confirmed that BRMS1 inhibited blood vessel formation and the recruitment of CD31-positive cells in matrigel plugs. Taken together, BRMS1 expression was decreased in metastatic melanomas, which resulted in deficient suppression of angiogenesis and contributed to melanoma progression. BRMS1 may serve an important prognostic marker and therapeutic target for melanoma patients.Oncogene advance online publication, 11 October 2010; doi:10.1038/onc.2010.470.
  BACKGROUND: Despite many one- or two-modal attempts to relieve postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) and pain, postoperative issues following breast cancer surgery remain a substantial problem. Therefore, the aim of this explorative, hypothesis-generating study was to evaluate the effect of a multimodal, opiate-sparing, evidence-based regimen for prevention of PONV and pain. METHODS: Two hundred consecutive patients scheduled for breast cancer surgery were included. The prevention regimen included a package consisting of preoperative paracetamol, dextromethorphan, celecoxib, gabapentin, dexamethasone, total intravenous anaesthesia and intraoperative ondansetron. The patients were prospectively scored according to PONV, pain during rest and mobilization and major side effects. RESULTS: Of 200 consecutive breast cancer patients, 191 received the full package. During the first 36 postoperative hours, 79.1% reported no PONV at all and only 3.7% reported severe PONV. At rest, 69.6% reported no or light pain and 3.1% reported severe pain, with corresponding values of 59.7% and 8.9% during arm mobilization. Mean postoperative morphine consumption was 2.2 mg. The only significant side effect was transient dizziness. CONCLUSION: A multimodal, opiate-sparing regimen to prevent pain and PONV seems to be more effective than one- or two-component regimens on PONV and pain after breast cancer surgery, a result which calls for large-scale multi-center or randomized studies.
  PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review summarizes epidemiological data linking the fatty acid desaturation index measured in blood lipids, as a biomarker of hepatic stearoyl-CoA desaturase activity, the key enzyme involved in the synthesis of monounsaturated fatty acids from saturated fatty acids, to breast cancer risk. The biological plausibility of this association is discussed. RECENT FINDINGS: Epidemiological cohort studies reported an association between a high saturated to monounsaturated fatty acid ratio measured in blood lipids, indicating low stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 activity, and decreased breast cancer risk. The suppression of stearoyl-CoA desaturase expression reduces cancer cell proliferation and in-vitro invasiveness, and dramatically impairs tumor formation and growth. These effects could not be overcome by supplying exogenous monounsaturated fatty acids. SUMMARY: Epidemiological findings, in accordance with experimental data, suggested that decreased hepatic stearoyl-CoA desaturase expression/activity may be related to decreased risk of breast cancer.
  Postmenopausal women show the highest incidence of breast cancer in the female population and are often affected by metabolic syndrome. Metabolic syndrome (MS)-characterized by central adiposity, insulin resistance, low serum high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), high serum triglyceride and high blood pressure-seems to be strictly correlated to breast carcinogenesis. We enrolled 777 healthy women and women with breast cancer in our nested casecontrol study to evaluate the association between MS and breast cancer, analyzing anthropometric parameters (weight, height, BMI, waist and hip circumference), blood pressure, serum HDL-C, triglyceride, fasting plasma glucose, insulin, testosterone and uric acid levels and administering a questionnaire about physical activity, food intake, tobacco use, alcohol abuse, personal and familial history of disease. We found an higher prevalence of metabolic syndrome (30%) in postmenopausal breast cancer patients compared to healthy women (19%). None of the individual MS features was strong enough to be considered responsible for breast carcinogenesis alone. However, of the 63 postmenopausal breast cancer cases associated to MS, 30% presented three or more MS features, suggesting that the activation of multiple molecular pathways underlying MS might contribute to tumorigenesis. Our data support the hypothesis that MS may be an indicator of breast cancer risk in postmenopausal women. The unsettlement of the hormonal arrangement in postmenopausal, along with an increase in visceral adiposity, probably favour the hormone-dependent cell proliferation, which drives tumorigenesis. Adjustments in lifestyle with physical activity intensification and healthy diet could represent modifiable factors for the primary prevention of sporadic breast cancer.

  Background Cancer stem cells are presumed to have virtually unlimited proliferative and self-renewal abilities and to be highly resistant to chemotherapy, a feature that is associated with overexpression of ATP-binding cassette transporters. We investigated whether prolonged continuous selection of cells for drug resistance enriches cultures for cancer stem-like cells. Methods Cancer stem cells were defined as CD44+/CD24- cells that could self-renew (ie, generate cells with the tumorigenic CD44+/CD24- phenotype), differentiate, invade, and form tumors in vivo. We used doxorubicin-selected MCF-7/ADR cells, weakly tumorigenic parental MCF-7 cells, and MCF-7/MDR, an MCF-7 subline with forced expression of ABCB1 protein. Cells were examined for cell surface markers and side-population fractions by microarray and flow cytometry, with in vitro invasion assays, and for ability to form mammospheres. Xenograft tumors were generated in mice to examine tumorigenicity (n = 52). The mRNA expression of multidrug resistance genes was examined in putative cancer stem cells and pathway analysis of statistically significantly differentially expressed genes was performed. All statistical tests were two-sided. Results Pathway analysis showed that MCF-7/ADR cells express mRNAs from ABCB1 and other genes also found in breast cancer stem cells (eg, CD44, TGFB1, and SNAI1). MCF-7/ADR cells were highly invasive, formed mammospheres, and were tumorigenic in mice. In contrast to parental MCF-7 cells, more than 30% of MCF-7/ADR cells had a CD44+/CD24- phenotype, could self-renew, and differentiate (ie, produce CD44+/CD24- and CD44+/CD24+ cells) and overexpressed various multidrug resistance-linked genes (including ABCB1, CCNE1, and MMP9). MCF-7/ADR cells were statistically significantly more invasive in Matrigel than parental MCF-7 cells (MCF-7 cells = 0.82 cell per field and MCF-7/ADR = 7.51 cells per field, difference = 6.69 cells per field, 95% confidence interval = 4.82 to 8.55 cells per field, P < .001). No enrichment in the CD44+/CD24- or CD133+ population was detected in MCF-7/MDR. Conclusion The cell population with cancer stem cell characteristics increased after prolonged continuous selection for doxorubicin resistance.
  Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4a) is a liver-enriched master regulator of liver function. HNF4a is important in regulating hepatic expression of certain cytochrome P450s. The purpose of this study was to use mice lacking HNF4a expression in liver (HNF4a-HNull) to elucidate the role of HNF4a in regulating hepatic expression of phase-II enzymes and transporters in mice. Compared to male wild-type mice, HNF4a-HNull male mouse livers had: 1) markedly lower mRNAs encoding the uptake transporters sodium taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide (Ntcp), organic anion transporting polypeptide 1a1 (Oatp1a1), Oatp2b1, organic anion transporter 2, sodium phosphate cotransporter type 1, sulfate anion transporter 1, sodium-dependent vitamin C transporter 1, the phase-II enzymes UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 2a3 (Ugt2a3), Ugt2b1, Ugt3a1, Ugt3a2, sulfotransferase 1a1 (Sult1a1), Sult1b1, Sult5a1, the efflux transporters multidrug resistance-associated protein 6 (Mrp6) and multidrug and toxin extrusion 1; 2) moderately lower mRNAs encoding Oatp1b2, organic cation transporter 1, Ugt1a5, Ugt1a9, glutathione S-transferase m4 (Gstm4), Gstm6, and breast cancer resistance protein; but 3) higher mRNAs encoding Oatp1a4, organic cation transporter n2, Ugt1a1, Sult1e1, Sult2a2, Gsta4, Gstm1-m3, multidrug resistance protein 1a (Mdr1a), Mrp3, and Mrp4. Hepatic signaling of nuclear factor-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) and Pregnane X receptor appear to be activated in HNF4a-HNull mice. In conclusion, HNF4a deficiency markedly alters hepatic mRNA expression of a large number of phase-II enzymes and transporters, probably due to the loss of HNF4a, which is a transactivator and a determinant of gender-specific expression, and/or adaptive activation of signaling pathways important in hepatic regulation of these phase-II enzymes and transporters.
  OBJECTIVE: The objective is to systematically estimate the current cancer incidence and mortality from the six leading cancer types globally and by sub-regions resulting from exposure to known risk factors such as tobacco use, elevated body weight, alcohol consumption, inadequate physical activity, unhealthy diet and infections. METHODS: Cancer incidence, mortality and burden of disease caused by the main cancer risk factors were calculated using comparative risk assessment methods and updated data on mortality and risks. RESULTS: Lung cancer was the most common cancer in men and breast cancer the most common cancer in women, both in terms of incidence and mortality. The five leading behavioral and dietary risks-high body mass index, low fruit and vegetable intake, physical inactivity, tobacco use and alcohol use-were responsible for 24% of new cancer cases and 30% of cancer deaths. Cancers with the largest proportions attributable to preventable risk factors were cervical cancer (100%) and lung cancer (71%). Seventy percent of liver cancers and 60% of stomach cancers were due to infectious agents. A higher proportion of cancer deaths was attributed to infections in low- and middle-income than in high-income countries. CONCLUSIONS: The cancer burden is driven by changes in exposure to influential risk factors and can be influenced by preventive interventions aimed at reducing these exposures.
  BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: To measure the distance between surgical clips and edge of CT-defined seroma in a coronal plane in women who have undergone wide local excision of breast cancer and to evaluate dosimetric coverage of CT-defined boost volumes by conventional clip-based electron fields. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Planning CT images of 30 lumpectomy cavities from 30 patients were reviewed. All seroma cavities had at least 4 clips and Cavity Visualization Score ⩾3. Distances between clips and seroma edge (D(c-s)) were measured at the radial margins for each patient. Clips-based electron fields were generated by including all the clips with 2cm margin in the coronal plane and three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy plans (3D-CRT) were devised based on CT tumor beds (CT-TBs). The parameters of dose-volume histogram between the two boost treatment plans were analyzed. RESULTS: The mean seroma edge extended beyond the clips by 0.3-0.5cm. In all 120 D(c-s)s, 76.7% were ⩽0.5cm, 8.3% were >1cm and 15% were between 0.5 and 1cm. Twenty patients (20/30) had D(c-smax) (The maximal D(c-s) of each patient)>0.5cm and 7 patients had D(c-smax)>1cm. With the electron fields, only 46.7% (14/30) had D(90) (The minimal dose received by 90% of the planning target volume (PTV))>90% and geographical miss (any portion of the PTV receiving <50% of the prescribed dose) was found in 36.7% (11/30). D(c-smax)>0.5cm was associated with D(90)<90% (P<0.001) and >1cm was associated with geographic miss (P=0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Surgical clips are not always consistent with the edge of seroma. Electron boost field based on clips leads to insufficient dose coverage to the CT-TB. 3D-CRT planning should be considered to ameliorate the dose coverage to the tumor bed.
  The present investigation reports on the conditions for preparation of tamoxifen loaded PLGA nanoparticles (Tmx-NPs) for oral administration. Tmx-NPs with >85% entrapment efficiency and 165.58 ± 3.81 nm particle size were prepared and freeze dried. Freeze dried Tmx-NPs were found to be stable in various simulated GIT media (pH 1.2, pH 3.5, pH 6.8, SGF & SIF). No significant changes in characteristics of Tmx-NPs were observed after 3 months accelerated stability studies. The cell viability in C127I cells was found to be relatively lower in Tmx-NP treated cells as compared to free Tmx treated cells. CLSM imaging reveled that nanoparticles were efficiently localized into the nuclear region of C127I cells. Oral bioavailability of Tmx was increased by 3.84 and 11.19 times as compared to the free Tmx citrate and Tmx base respectively, when formulated in NPs. In vivo oral antitumor efficacy of Tmx-NPs was carried out in DMBA induced breast tumor model and tumor size was reduced up to 41.56% as compared to untreated groups which showed an increase in tumor size up to 158.66%. Finally, Tmx-NPs showed the marked reduction in hepatotoxicty when compared with free Tmx citrate as evidenced by histopathological examination of liver tissue as well as AST, ALT and MDA levels. Therefore Tmx-NPs could have the significant value for the oral chronic breast cancer therapy with reduced hepatotoxicity.
  Substantial evidence suggests that catechol estrogen-3,4-quinones, react with DNA to form predominantly the depurinating adducts, 4-hydroxyestrone(estradiol)-1-N3Ade [4-OHE(1)(E(2))-1-N3Ade] and 4-OHE(1)(E(2))-1-N7Gua. Apurinic sites resulting from these adducts generate critical mutations that can initiate cancer. The paradigm of cancer initiation is based on imbalancing estrogen metabolism between activating pathways that lead to estrogen-DNA adducts and deactivating pathways that lead to estrogen metabolites and conjugates. This balance can be improved to minimize formation of adducts by using antioxidants, such as resveratrol (Resv) and N-acetylcysteine (NAcCys). To compare the ability of Resv and NAcCys to block formation of estrogen-DNA adducts, we used the human breast epithelial cell line MCF-10F treated with 4-OHE(2). Resv and NAcCys directed metabolism of 4-OHE(2) toward protective pathways. NAcCys reacted with the quinones and reduced the semiquinones to catechols. The latter pathway was also carried out by Resv. In addition, Resv induced the protective enzyme quinone reductase, which reduces E(1)(E(2))-3,4-quinones to 4-OHE(1)(E(2)). Resv was more effective in increasing the amount of 4-OCH(3)E(1)(E(2)) than NAcCys. Inhibition of estrogen-DNA adduct formation was similar at lower doses, but at higher doses Resv was about 50% more effective than NAcCys. Their combined effects were additive. Therefore, these two antioxidants provide an excellent combination to protect catechol estrogens from oxidation to catechol quinones.
  The synthesis of Silicalites and Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles (MSN), which covalently incorporate original water-soluble photosensitizers for PDT applications is described. PDT was performed on MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. All the nanoparticles showed significant cell death after irradiation, which was not correlated with (1)O(2) quantum yield of the nanoparticles. Other parameters are involved and in particular the surface and shape of the nanoparticles which influence the pathway of endocytosis. Functionalisation with mannose was necessary to obtain the best results with PDT due to an active endocytosis of mannose-functionalized nanoparticles. The quantity of mannose on the surface should be carefully adjusted as a too high amount of mannose impairs the phototoxicity of the nanoparticles. Fluorescein was also encapsulated in MCM-41 type MSN in order to localize the nanoparticles in the organelles of the cells by confocal microscopy. The MSN were localized in lysosomes after active endocytosis by mannose receptors.
  OBJECTIVE: There is much research describing cancer patients' information needs and their use of the Internet, print media, and other sources to fulfill these needs. Yet little is known about whether patients with different types of cancer vary in their information needs and seeking behaviors. This study used population-based data to address this question. METHODS: A sample was randomly drawn from the list of patients with breast, prostate, or colorectal cancer reported to the Pennsylvania Cancer Registry in 2005. Patients completed a mail survey (N=2010); respective response rates were 68%, 64%, and 61%. RESULTS: Colorectal cancer patients reported consistently less information seeking than breast and prostate cancer patients. Multivariate analyses revealed that differences by cancer type were not explained by sex or other demographics, disease stage, or treatment received. These differences were most pronounced among patients with early stage cancer. CONCLUSION: Cancer patients have myriad information needs and use a range of sources to satisfy these needs, but there appear to be important differences in information engagement by cancer type. PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS: Understanding differences in information seeking among disease-specific populations may help guide future patient education and decision making across the care continuum.
  PURPOSE: To develop a split-luciferase-based reporter system that allows for noninvasive monitoring of activation of the Her2/neu pathway in vivo in a quantitative and sensitive manner. METHODS AND MATERIALS: Fusion proteins of the ErbB2/Her2/neu receptor to the N-terminal fragment of luciferase and of its downstream binding partner Shc to the C-terminal fragment of luciferase have been engineered owing to the rationale that on activation and binding of the Her2 receptor molecule to Shc, luciferase function will be reconstituted. Thus, the resulting bioluminescence signals can serve as a surrogate measure of receptor activation. RESULTS: We have shown that our reporter systems functions well in vitro in breast cancer cells and in vivo in xenograft tumors. In particular, the activities of Her2/neu in xenograft tumors could be monitored serially for an extended period after radiotherapy. CONCLUSIONS: We believe that the novel ErbB2/Her2/neu reporter we have presented is a powerful tool to study the biology of the Her2-neu pathway in vitro and in vivo. It should also facilitate the development and rapid evaluation of new Her2/neu-targeted therapeutic agents.
  Multi-drug resistance (MDR) represents a major obstacle for chemotherapeutic treatment of a wide variety of human cancers. Increased expression of drug efflux pumps, such as the P-glycoprotein (P-gp) have been linked to development of MDR. Herein, we have identified protein kinase D isoform 2 (PKD2) as an important regulator of MDR and P-gp expression in paclitaxel-treated breast cancer cell lines. PKD2 was expressed with the highest phosphorylated activation status in the MDA-MB-231 cell line. MDA-MB-231 cells were also found to exhibit the highest level of resistance to an array of chemotherapeutic drugs. To further characterize the relationship between PKD2 activation and MDR, we next focused on the effects of the chemotherapeutic agent paclitaxel in MDA-MB-231 cells. Treatment with paclitaxel was shown to induce both PKD2 phosphorylation and P-gp expression in a time-dependent manner. Importantly, shRNA-mediated knockdown of PKD2 in MDA-MB-231 cells resulted in a significant decrease in resistance to paclitaxel, evident as significant decreases in both the IC(50) value and the resistance index (RI). Concurrent with the decrease in drug resistance, paclitaxel-induced expression of P-gp was also significantly reduced in PKD knockdown cells. These results indicate that PKD2 is required for paclitaxel-induced MDR and expression of P-gp. Therefore, modulation of PKD2 activity represents an attractive therapeutic strategy for improvement of the clinical effectiveness of chemotherapy.
  Human estrogen receptor α (ERα) is a nuclear transcription factor that displays a major therapeutic target for breast cancer. The transcriptional activity of ERα can be regulated by particular estrogen receptor modulators. Celastrol, a quinine methide triterpene extracted from a Chinese medicine (Trypterygium wilfordii Hook F.), has been reported to have therapeutic efficacy against various cancer cells, including prostate cancer, leukemia, and melanoma cells. However, ERα regulation by Celastrol has not been reported. In this study, we investigated the effects of Celastrol on the growth of breast cancer cells. We observed that Celastrol decreased expression of ERα at both the mRNA and the protein levels in MCF7 and T47D human breast cancer cells. Results from a luciferase assay showed that Celastrol decreased the transcriptional activity of ERα. Also, Celastrol treatment inhibited ERα target gene expression, including expressions of cyclin D(1), progesterone receptor (PR), and c-Myb leading to cell cycle arrest and growth inhibition of breast cancer cells. We propose that Celastrol, an anti-cancer drug extracted from natural sources, induces inhibition of cell growth through modulation of ERα in estrogen positive breast cancer cells and is a candidate for use in cancer chemotherapy for human breast cancer.
  Several novel 6-[(hetero)arylamino]thieno[3,2-b]pyridines were prepared by palladium-catalyzed C-N Buchwald-Hartwig coupling of the methyl 3-amino-6-bromothieno[3,2-b]pyridine-2-carboxylate with aryl and heteroarylamines, using different reaction conditions. The antitumoral activity of the di(hetero)arylamines obtained was evaluated against three representative human tumor cell lines, namely breast adenocarcinoma (MCF-7), melanoma (A375-C5), and non-small cell lung cancer (NCI-H460) and some structure-activity relationships were established within each series. The most promising compounds were shown to be a benzothiazole derivative with GI(50) 3.5-6.9 μM followed by an indole derivative with GI(50) 13-21 μM.
  PURPOSE: The impact of using the Contura multilumen balloon (MLB) (SenoRx, Inc., Irvine, CA) breast brachytherapy catheter's vacuum port in patients treated with accelerated partial breast irradiation (APBI) was analyzed. METHODS AND MATERIALS: Data from 32 patients at two sites were reviewed. Variables analyzed included the seroma fluid (SF):air volume around the MLB before and after vacuum port use and on its ability to improve (1) the eligibility of patients for APBI and (2) dose coverage of the planning target volume for evaluation (PTV_EVAL) in eligible patients. RESULTS: The median SF/air volume before vacuum removal was 6.8cc vs. 0.8cc after vacuum removal (median reduction in SF/air volume was 90.5%). Before vacuum port use, the median SF/air volume expressed as percentage of the PTV_EVAL was 7.8% (range, 1.9-26.6) in all patients. After application of the vacuum, this was reduced to 1.2%. Before vacuum port use, 10 (31.3%) patients were not considered acceptable candidates for APBI because the SF/air volume:PTV_EVAL ratio (SF:PTV) was greater than 10% (range, 10.1-26.6%; median, 15.2%). After vacuum port use, the median SF:PTV ratio was 1.6% for a median reduction of 91.5%. In addition, the percentage of the prescribed dose covering greater than or equal to 90% of the PTV_EVAL proportionally increased a median of 8% (range, 3-10%) in eligible patients. CONCLUSION: Use of the Contura MLB vacuum port significantly improved the conformity of the target tissue to the balloon surface, leading to reproducible dose delivery and increased target volume coverage. In addition, application of the vacuum allowed the safe treatment of unacceptable patients with APBI.
  PURPOSE: The purpose of the present study was to quantify the robustness of the dose distributions from three whole-breast radiotherapy (RT) techniques involving different levels of intensity modulation against whole patient setup inaccuracies and breast shape changes. METHODS AND MATERIALS: For 19 patients (one computed tomography scan and five cone beam computed tomography scans each), three treatment plans were made (wedge, simple intensity-modulated RT [IMRT], and full IMRT). For each treatment plan, four dose distributions were calculated. The first dose distribution was the original plan. The other three included the effects of patient setup errors (rigid displacement of the bony anatomy) or breast errors (e.g., rotations and shape changes of the breast with respect to the bony anatomy), or both, and were obtained through deformable image registration and dose accumulation. Subsequently, the effects of the plan type and error sources on target volume coverage, mean lung dose, and excess dose were determined. RESULTS: Systematic errors of 1-2 mm and random errors of 2-3 mm (standard deviation) were observed for both patient- and breast-related errors. Planning techniques involving glancing fields (wedge and simple IMRT) were primarily affected by patient errors (∼6% loss of coverage near the dorsal field edge and ∼2% near the skin). In contrast, plan deterioration due to breast errors was primarily observed in planning techniques without glancing fields (full IMRT, ∼2% loss of coverage near the dorsal field edge and ∼4% near the skin). CONCLUSION: The influences of patient and breast errors on the dose distributions are comparable in magnitude for whole breast RT plans, including glancing open fields, rendering simple IMRT the preferred technique. Dose distributions from planning techniques without glancing open fields were more seriously affected by shape changes of the breast, demanding specific attention in partial breast planning techniques.
  The synthesis and study of the structure-activity relationships of a series of rigid analogues of combretastatin A-4 are described which contain the 1,4-diaryl-2-azetidinone (β-lactam) ring system in place of the usual ethylene bridge present in the natural combretastatin stilbene products. The 1,4-diaryl-2-azetidinones are unsubstituted at C-3, or contain methyl substituent(s) at C-3. The most potent compounds 12d and 12e display antiproliferative activity at nanomolar concentrations when evaluated against the MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 human breast carcinoma cell lines. 12d exerts antimitotic effects through an inhibition of tubulin polymerisation and subsequent G(2)/M arrest of the cell cycle in human MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, with similar activity to that of CA-4. These novel β-lactam compounds are identified as potentially useful scaffolds for the further development of antitumour agents which target tubulin.
  Proteomics-based analysis is currently the most promising approach for identifying biomarker proteins for use in drug development. However, many candidate biomarker proteins that are over- or under-expressed in diseased tissues are found by such a procedure. Thus, establishment of an efficient method for screening and validating the more valuable targets is urgently required. Here, we describe the development of an "antibody proteomics system" that facilitates the screening of biomarker proteins from many candidates by rapid preparation of cross-reacting antibodies using phage antibody library technology. Using two-dimensional differential in-gel electrophoresis analysis, 16 over-expressed proteins from breast cancer cells were identified. Specifically, proteins were recovered from the gel pieces and a portion of each sample was used for mass spectrometry analysis. The remainder was immobilized onto a nitrocellulose membrane for antibody-expressing phage enrichment and selection. Using this procedure, antibody-expressing phages against each protein were successfully isolated within two weeks. The expression profiles of the identified proteins were then acquired by immunostaining of breast tumor tissue microarrays with the antibody-expressing phages. Using this approach, expression of Eph receptor A10, TRAIL-R2 and Cytokeratin 8 in breast tumor tissues were successfully validated. These results demonstrate the antibody proteomics system is an efficient method for screening tumor-related biomarker proteins.
  Neuregulin-1 (NRG-1), a cardioactive growth factor released from endothelial cells, is indispensable for cardiac development, structural maintenance, and functional integrity of the heart. In recent years, a growing number of studies have focused on NRG-1 and members of the ErbB family that serve as receptors for NRG-1 in order to better understand the role of this signaling pathway in physiology and pathophysiology of the heart. An essential role for NRG-1 and ErbB in heart development and functionality has been suggested by studies in conditional NRG-1/ErbB-deficient mice and by the cardiac-related side effects of anti-ErbB2 antibody therapies used for treatment of breast cancer. In vitro and in vivo studies using recombinant human neuregulin-1 (rhNRG-1), which contains the epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like domain (necessary for ErbB2/ErbB4 activation), have further supported the hypothesis that NRG-1 plays an important role in heart function. Consistent with other studies, expression of rhNRG-1 not only restored normal cardiomyocytic structure altered by nutritional deficiency in cell cultures, but also improved the pumping function of the heart in several animal models of chronic heart failure (CHF). As a result of these findings, proteins involved in the NRG-1/ErbB-signaling pathway have been explored as potential drug targets for treatment of heart failure. Clinical trials to evaluate the safety and efficacy of rhNRG-1 have been conducted in both China and Australia. As predicted, rhNRG-1 treatment improved both cardiac function and reversed remodeling of the heart. Therefore, rhNRG-1 may represent a new drug for treatment of CHF with a novel therapeutic mechanism.
  Regulatory regions of the human genome can be modified through epigenetic processes during prenatal life to make an individual more likely to suffer chronic diseases when they reach adulthood. The modification of chromatin and DNA contributes to a larger well-documented process known as "programming" whereby stressors in the womb give rise to adult onset diseases, including cancer. It is now well known that death from ischemic heart disease is related to birth weight; the lower the birth weight, the higher the risk of death from cardiovascular disease as well as type 2 diabetes and osteoporosis. Recent epidemiological data link rapid growth in the womb to metabolic disease and obesity and also to breast and lung cancers. There is increasing evidence that "marked" regions of DNA can become "unmarked" under the influence of dietary nutrients. This gives hope for reversing propensities for cancers and other diseases that were acquired in the womb. For several cancers, the size and shape of the placenta are associated with a person's cardiovascular and cancer risks as are maternal body mass index and height. The features of placental growth and nutrient transport properties that lead to adult disease have been little studied. In conclusion, several cancers have their origins in the womb, including lung and breast cancer. More research is needed to determine the epigenetic processes that underlie the programming of these diseases.
  PURPOSE: To provide guidance for clinicians about the diagnosis, staging and treatment of breast cancer occurring during an otherwise uncomplicated pregnancy. METHODS: An international expert Panel convened to address a series of questions identified by a literature review and personal experience. Issues relating to the diagnosis and management of breast cancer after delivery were outside the scope. RESULTS: There is a paucity of large and/or randomized studies. Based on cohort studies, case series and case reports, the recommendations represent the best available evidence, albeit of a lower grade than is optimal. RECOMMENDATIONS: In most circumstances, serious consideration should be given to the option of treating breast cancer whilst continuing with the pregnancy. Each woman should ideally be referred to a centre with sufficient expertise, given a clear explanation of treatment options. Most diagnostic and staging examinations can be performed adequately and safely during pregnancy. Treatment should however be adapted to the clinical presentation and the trimester of the pregnancy: surgery can be performed during all trimesters of pregnancy; radiotherapy can be considered during the first and second trimester but should be postponed during the third trimester; and standard chemotherapies can be used during the second and third trimester. Since neonatal morbidity mainly appears to be related to prematurity, delivery should not be induced before 37weeks, if at all possible. CONCLUSIONS: The treatment of breast cancer in pregnancy should be executed by experienced specialists in a multidisciplinary setting and should adhere as closely as possible to standard protocols.
  PURPOSE: To assess the use of trastuzumab concurrently with whole brain radiotherapy (WBRT) for patients with brain metastases from human epidermal growth factor receptor-2-positive breast cancer. METHODS AND MATERIALS: Between April 2001 and April 2007, 31 patients with brain metastases from human epidermal growth factor receptor-2-positive breast cancer were referred for WBRT with concurrent trastuzumab. At brain progression, the median age was 55 years (range, 38-73), and all patients had a performance status of 0-2. The patients received trastuzumab 2 mg/kg weekly (n = 17) or 6 mg/kg repeated every 21 days (n = 14). In 26 patients, concurrent WBRT delivered 30 Gy in 10 daily fractions. In 6 patients, other fractionations were chosen because of either poor performance status or patient convenience. RESULTS: After WBRT, radiologic responses were observed in 23 patients (74.2%), including 6 (19.4%) with a complete radiologic response and 17 (54.8%) with a partial radiologic response. Clinical responses were observed in 27 patients (87.1%). The median survival time from the start of WBRT was 18 months (range, 2-65). The median interval to brain progression was 10.5 months (range, 2-27). No Grade 2 or greater acute toxicity was observed. CONCLUSION: The low toxicity of trastuzumab concurrently with WBRT should probably not justify delays. Although promising, these preliminary data warrant additional validation of trastuzumab as a potential radiosensitizer for WBRT in brain metastases from breast cancer in the setting of a clinical trial.
  PURPOSE: To document clinical training and resident working conditions reported by chief residents during their residency. METHODS AND MATERIALS: During the academic years 2005 to 2006, 2006 to 2007, and 2007 to 2008, the Association of Residents in Radiation Oncology conducted a nationwide survey of all radiation oncology chief residents in the United States. Chi-square statistics were used to assess changes in clinical training and resident working conditions over time. RESULTS: Surveys were completed by representatives from 55 programs (response rate, 71.4%) in 2005 to 2006, 60 programs (75.9%) in 2006 to 2007, and 74 programs (93.7%) in 2007 to 2008. Nearly all chief residents reported receiving adequate clinical experience in commonly treated disease sites, such as breast and genitourinary malignancies; and commonly performed procedures, such as three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy and intensity-modulated radiotherapy. Clinical experience in extracranial stereotactic radiotherapy increased over time (p < 0.001), whereas clinical experience in endovascular brachytherapy (p <0.001) decreased over time. The distribution of gynecologic and prostate brachytherapy cases remained stable, while clinical case load in breast brachytherapy increased (p = 0.006). A small but significant percentage of residents reported receiving inadequate clinical experience in pediatrics, seeing 10 or fewer pediatric cases during the course of residency. Procedures involving higher capital costs, such as particle beam therapy and intraoperative radiotherapy, and infrequent clinical use, such as head and neck brachytherapy, were limited to a minority of institutions. Most residency programs associated with at least one satellite facility have incorporated resident rotations into their clinical training, and the majority of residents at these programs find them valuable experiences. The majority of residents reported working 60 or fewer hours per week on required clinical duties. CONCLUSIONS: Trends in clinical training and resident working conditions over 3 years are documented to allow residents and program directors to assess their residency training.
  PURPOSE: Several accelerated partial breast irradiation (APBI) techniques are described in the literature, and apparently, the three-dimensional (3D)-conformal technique is being used increasingly. Nonetheless, the optimal radiation dose is not yet known. Here, we report feasibility and early toxicities of APBI delivering 40 Gy over 5 days, in a phase II trial. METHODS AND MATERIALS: From October 2007 to September 2008, 25 patients with pT1N0 cancer received 3D-conformal APBI. The prescribed radiation dose was 40 Gy in 4-Gy fractions given twice daily. This technique used two minitangents and an "en face" electron field. Toxicities were systematically assessed at 1, 2, and 6 months and then once every 6 months. RESULTS: The planning tumor volume for evaluation (PTV_EVAL) coverage was adequate: the mean dose to the PTV_EVAL was 41.8 Gy (range, 41-42.4 Gy). Mean doses to the ipsilateral lung and heart were 1.6 Gy (range, 1.0-2.3 Gy) and 1.2 Gy (range, 1.0-1.6 Gy), respectively. One and two months after completion of APBI, most patients had no or mild erythema (n = 16 patients at 1 month; n = 25 patients at 2 months); none of these patients developed moist desquamation. After a median follow-up of 12 months, only 1 patient had a significant moderate field contracture (grade 2). Other reported late toxicities were grade 1. CONCLUSIONS: 3D-conformal APBI (with two minitangents and an "en face" electron field) using a total dose of 40 Gy in 10 fractions twice daily over 5 days achieved appropriate PTV_EVAL coverage and offered significant sparing of normal tissue. Early tolerance was excellent.
  PURPOSE: To objectively evaluate the radiation dermatitis caused by accelerated partial breast irradiation (APBI) using high-dose-rate interstitial brachytherapy. PATIENTS AND METHODS: The skin color and moisture changes were examined using a newly installed spectrophotometer and corneometer in 22 patients who had undergone APBI using open cavity implant high-dose-rate interstitial brachytherapy (36 Gy in six fractions) and compared with the corresponding values for 44 patients in an external beam radiotherapy (EBRT) control group (50-60 Gy in 25-30 fractions within 5-6 weeks) after breast conserving surgery. RESULTS: All values changed significantly as a result of APBI. The extent of elevation in a∗ (reddish) and reduction in L∗ (black) values caused by APBI were similar to those for EBRT, with slightly delayed recovery for 6-12 months after treatment owing to the surgical procedure. In contrast, only APBI caused a change in the b∗ values, and EBRT did not, demonstrating that the reduction in b∗ values (yellowish) depends largely on the surgical procedure. The changes in moisture were less severe after APBI than after EBRT, and the recovery was more rapid. The toxicity assessment using the Common Toxicity Criteria, version 3, showed that all dermatitis caused by APBI was Grade 2 or less. CONCLUSION: An objective analysis can quantify the effects of APBI procedures on color and moisture cosmesis. The radiation dermatitis caused by APBI using the present schedule showed an equivalent effect on skin color and a less severe effect on moisture than the effects caused by standard EBRT.
  BACKGROUND: New Zealand Maori have a poorer outcome from breast cancer than non-Maori, yet prognostic data are sparse. The objective of this study was to quantify levels of prognostic factors in a cohort of self-declared Maori and European breast cancer patients from Christchurch, New Zealand. Methods and Results Clinicopathological and survival data from 337 consecutive breast cancer patients (27 Maori, 310 European) were evaluated. Fewer tumours were high grade in Maori women than European women (p=0.027). No significant ethnic differences were detected for node status, tumour type, tumour size, human epidermal growth factor receptor, oestrogen and progesterone receptor (ER/PR) status, or survival. In addition, tumour and serum samples from a sub-cohort of 14 Maori matched to 14 NZ European patients were analyzed by immunohistochemistry and enzyme linked immunosorbent assay for molecular prognostic factors. Significant correlations were detected between increased grade and increased levels of hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1alpha), glucose transporter-1 (GLUT-1), microvessel density (MVD) and cytokeratins CK5/6 (p<0.05). High nodal status correlated with reduced carbonic anhydrase IX (CA-IX). Negative ER/PR status correlated with increased GLUT-1, CA-IX and MVD. Within the molecular factors, increased HIF-1alpha correlated with raised GLUT-1, MVD and CK5/6, and CK5/6 with GLUT-1 and MVD (p<0.05). The small number of patients in this sub-cohort limited discrimination of ethnic differences. CONCLUSIONS: In this Christchurch cohort of breast cancer patients, Maori women were no more likely than European women to have pathological or molecular factors predictive of poor prognosis. These data contrast with data from the North Island NZ, and suggest potential regional differences.
  BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play an important role in the regulation of cell growth, differentiation, apoptosis, and carcinogenesis. Detection of their expression may lead to identifying novel markers for breast cancer. METHODS: We profiled miRNA expression in three breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7, MDA-MB-231, and MDA-MB-468) and then focused on one miRNA, miR-339-5p, for its role in regulation of tumor cell growth, migration, and invasion and target gene expression. We then analyzed miR-339-5p expression in benign and cancerous breast tissue specimens. RESULTS: A number of miRNAs were differentially expressed in these cancer cell lines. Real-time PCR indicated that miR-339-5p expression was downregulated in the aggressive cell lines MDA-MB-468 and MDA-MB-231 and in breast cancer tissues compared with benign tissues. Transfection of miR-339-5p oligonucleotides reduced cancer cell growth only slightly but significantly decreased tumor cell migration and invasion capacity compared with controls. Real-time PCR analysis showed that BCL-6, a potential target gene of miR-339-5p, was downregulated in MDA-MB-231 cells by miR-339-5p transfection. Furthermore, the reduced miR-339-5p expression was associated with an increase in metastasis to lymph nodes and with high clinical stages. Kaplan-Meier analyses found that the patients with miR-339-5p expression had better overall and relapse-free survivals compared with those without miR-339-5p expression. Cox proportional hazards analyses showed that miR-339-5p expression was an independent prognostic factor for breast cancer patients. CONCLUSIONS: MiR-339-5p may play an important role in breast cancer progression, suggesting that miR-339-5p should be further evaluated as a biomarker for predicting the survival of breast cancer patients.
  BACKGROUND: LATS2, which encodes a novel serine/threonine kinase, is known to be important in centrosome duplication and in the maintenance of genomic stability. Recently, a potential role for LATS2 in cancer has been reported. In breast cancer and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), LATS2 mRNA is downregulated and has been suggested to be a tumor suppressor. However, the role of LATS2 in nasopharyngeal carcinoma has not been investigated. In this study, we aimed to investigate the expression pattern of LATS2 and its clinicopathological involvement in nasopharyngeal carcinoma to understand its effect on cell survival. METHODS: Using quantitative real time PCR and immunoblotting, the expression of LATS2 was detected in nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell lines and in the immortalized nasopharyngeal epithelial cell line NP69. Using immunohistochemistry, we analyzed LATS2 protein expression in 220 nasopharyngeal carcinoma cases. The association of LATS2 protein expression with the clinicopathological characteristics and the prognosis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma were subsequently assessed. Using methylation specific PCR, we detected the methylation status of the LATS2 promoter. RNA interference was performed by transfecting siRNA to specifically knock down LATS2 expression in 5-8F and CNE2. RESULTS: LATS2 protein was detected in 178 of 220 (80.91%) cases of nasopharyngeal carcinoma. LATS2 overexpression was a significant, independent prognosis predictor (P = 0.037) in nasopharyngeal carcinoma patients. Methylation specific PCR revealed that 36.7% (11/30) of nasopharyngeal carcinoma tissues and all of the chronic nasopharyngeal inflammation samples were methylated. Functional studies showed that the suppression of LATS2 expression in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (5-8F and CNE2) cell lines by using specific small interfering (siRNA) resulted in the inhibition of growth, induction of apoptosis and S-phase cell cycle increase. Overexpression of LATS2 in NP69 stimulated cell proliferation. CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that LATS2 might play a role in the tumorigenesis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma by promoting the growth of nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells. Transfection with specific siRNA might be feasible for the inhibition of growth, induction of apoptosis and S phase increase in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
  Transient receptor potential melastatin 8 (TRPM8) is a non-selective cation channel activated by cold temperature and cooling agents. TRPM8 is expressed in a subpopulation of cold-sensitive sensory neurons, as well as in the male urogenital system. TRPM8 is markedly upregulated in prostate cancer and in other tumors such as breast adenocarcinoma and melanoma. Moreover, recent studies suggest the potential involvement of TRPM8 channels in the pathophysiology of cold nociception and cold allodynia. This has led to a strong interest in the pursuit of novel modulators of TRPM8 channels. This review highlights our current knowledge of TRPM8 pharmacology and modulation mechanisms, detailing structural features important for TRPM8 gating by different agonists, the mechanism of antagonism by different compounds and the potential relevance of TRPM8 for treatment of various pathological conditions.
  This article reviews laboratory and epidemiological research into the endocrine disruptive effects of components of personal care products, namely, phthalate esters, parabens, ultraviolet (UV) filters, polycyclic musks, and antimicrobials. High doses of phthalates in utero can produce &#x201C;phthalate syndrome,&#x201D; demasculinizing effects in male rat offspring due to impaired testosterone production by fetal testes. However, evidence linking phthalate exposure to similar effects in humans appears inconclusive. Furthermore, phthalate exposure derived from personal care products is within safe limits and its principal bioavailable phthalate, diethyl phthalate (DEP), does not produce &#x201C;phthalate syndrome.&#x201D; Parabens exhibit very weak estrogen activity in vitro and in vivo, but evidence of paraben-induced developmental and reproductive toxicity in vivo lacks consistency and physiological coherence. Evidence attempting to link paraben exposure with human breast cancer is nonexistent. Select UV filters at high doses produce estrogenic, antithyroid, and other effects in rats in vivo. Again, no evidence links UV filter exposure to endocrine disruptive effects in humans. Some polycyclic musks weakly bind to estrogen, androgen, or progestin receptors and exhibit primarily antagonistic activity in vitro, which for the most part, has yet to be confirmed in vivo in mammals. The antimicrobials triclocarban and triclosan evoke weak responses mediated by aryl hydrocarbon, estrogen, and androgen receptors in vitro, which require confirmation in vivo. Preliminary observations suggest a novel interaction between triclocarban and testosterone. In conclusion, although select constituents exhibit interactions with the endocrine system in the laboratory, the evidence linking personal care products to endocrine disruptive effects in humans is for the most part lacking.
  ABSTRACT Until recently, the best protection against breast cancer mortality was early diagnosis through mammographic screening. However, the possibility that breast cancer in some cases can be prevented has come to light over the past 30 years. Various risk reduction strategies of breast cancer have been explored including lifestyle modification, prophylactic surgeries, and the use of chemopreventive agents. This article is the second portion of a two-part series on breast cancer prevention, and will focus its discussion on the available risk reduction interventions that have been shown to prevent breast cancer in women considered high risk for the disease. &#x00A0;&#x00A0;&#x00A0;&#x00A0;&#x00A0;&#x00A0;(See Part I in Cancer Investigation, 28:743&#xFFFD;750, 2010).
  Mammary tumors are a major health threat to women and female dogs. In both metastasis of the primary tumor to distant organs is the most common cause of tumor-related death. Nevertheless, the molecular mechanisms of tumor metastasis are far from being understood and it is still unknown why some human and canine carcinomas metastasize and others do not. Using 2D-DIGE and MALDI-TOF-MS we identified 21 proteins with significant changes (fold change > 1.5; p < 0.05) in protein expression between metastasizing (n=6) and non-metastasizing (n=6) canine mammary carcinomas. Quantitative RT-PCR was used to identify transcriptional or post-transcriptional regulation of protein expression. Up-regulated proteins in metastatic carcinomas included PCNA, FTL, BOMAPIN, TPM3, TXNDC5, ADA, OAT, CORO1A, RANBP1, PGDH and EEF1D. Down-regulated proteins in metastatic carcinomas included CALB2, MYL2, PRDX6, MASPIN, FGB, VCL, IDH1, TPM1, ANXA5, and ARHGAP1. Interestingly, 19 of these 21 proteins have been described with a malignancy-associated expression in human breast cancer and other human cancer types before. Further investigations are now necessary to test whether these markers are of prognostic value for canine mammary carcinomas and whether their expression is directly involved in canine mammary carcinogenesis or represent solely a secondary reactive phenotype.
  Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles are widely used as nanoprobes for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Water-soluble iron oxide nanoparticles were synthesized by coating iron oxide nanoparticles with a hydrophilic, biocompatible, biodegradable poly(amino acid) derivative, poly(2-hydroxyethyl aspartamide) graft copolymer for negative contrast enhancement on T(2) weighted MRI. HER2/neu antibodies were conjugated on the surface of poly(amino acid) coated iron oxide nanoparticles for the detection of breast cancer. The antibody-grafted iron oxide nanoparticles (PAION-Ab) were about 31.1 nm in diameter. The T(2) relaxivity of PAION-Ab was 246 L·mmol(-1)·sec(-1) greater than that of the commercial product such as Feridex. PAION-Ab showed low cytotoxicity even at relatively high concentrations. Furthermore, Prussian blue staining and in vitro MRI study with SKBR-3, breast cancer cells overexpressing HER2/neu receptors indicated that PAION-Ab exhibited excellent cancer cell detection ability and enhanced signal intensities in the T(2)-weighted image.
  This study is to investigate the binding capability of lidamycin apoprotein (LDP), an enediyne-associated apoprotein of the chromoprotein antitumor antibiotic family, to human breast cancer and normal tissues, the correlation of LDP binding capability to human breast cancer tissues and the expression of tumor therapeutic targets such as VEGF and HER2. In this study, the binding capability of LDP to human breast cancer tissues was detected with tissue microarray. The correlation study of LDP binding capability to human breast tumor tissues and relevant therapeutic targets was performed on breast cancer tissue microarrays. Immunocytochemical examination was used to detect the binding capability of LDP to human breast carcinoma MCF-7 cells. As a result, tissue microarray showed that LDP staining of 73.2% (30/41) of breast cancer tissues was positive, whereas that of 48.3% (15/31) of the adjacent normal breast specimens was positive. The difference between the tumor and normal samples was significant (Chi2 = 4.63, P < 0.05). LDP immunoreactivity in breast cancer correlated significantly with the overexpression of VEGF and HER2 (P < 0.001 and < 0.01, r = 0.389 and 0.287, respectively). Determined with confocal immunofluorescent analysis, LDP showed the binding capability to mammary carcinoma MCF-7 cells. It is demonstrated that LDP can bind to human breast cancer tissues and there is significant difference between the breast cancer tissues and the corresponding normal tissues. Notably, the binding reactivity shows positive correlation with the expression of VEGF and HER2 in breast carcinoma tissues. The results imply that LDP may have a potential use as targeting drug carrier in the research and development of new anticancer therapeutics. This study may provide reference for drug combination of LDM and other therapeutic agents.

  OBJECTIVE: To introduce the College of American Pathologists/American College of Medical Genetics Cytogenetics Resource Committee criteria for genetic heterogeneity (GH) in HER2 testing, and investigate the clinicopathological significance of HER2 genetic heterogeneity in invasive breast cancer. METHODS: The clinical parameters of 100 cases of invasive breast carcinomas were collected. HER2 expression level and HER2 gene copy number in formalin-fixed and paraffin embedded tumor samples were detected by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), and the relationship between HER2 gene GH and clinicopathological characteristics were analyzed. RESULTS: Among the 100 patients, HER2 gene GH was observed in 20 (20%) cases. When the number of HER2 amplified cells was more than 25%, the frequencies of FISH positive were higher than those cases with less than 25% HER2 amplified cells. The results showed that HER2 gene GH was associated with the degree of HER2 protein expression (P=0.004), and ER expression (P=0.002). CONCLUSION: HER2 gene GH may be correlated with the HER2 protein IHC 1+/2+, and ER expression in breast carcinoma. It is important for doctors to avoid ignoring or only counting FISH positive cells leading to incorrect diagnosis for these patients.
  BACKGROUND: Beast cancer is the commonest malignancy afflicting women. It accounts for 18.4% of all female cancers worldwide. OBJECTIVE: To determine the diagnostic accuracy of fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) of palpable breast masses at a Nigerian University Teaching Hospital.. METHODS: Fine Needle Aspiration Cytology was done on all consecutive cases of palpable breast masses referred from the surgical outpatient clinic of the University of Benin Teaching Hospital between January 2005 and March 2006. Comparison was made with subsequent histological diagnoses in order to ascertain the diagnostic accuracy of the procedure. RESULTS: One hundred and three fine needle aspirates of breast masses were performed during the study period. Subsequent biopsies were done on 43 of these cases yielding a biopsy rate of 41.8%. The absolute and complete sensitivities of this study were 84.6% and 97.4% respectively. The full specificity was 64% while the specificity for biopsy cases was 75%. The positive predictive value for malignancies was 100% with a false positive rate of 0%; however the false negative rate was 2.6% with a suspicious rate of 9.7%. The inadequacy rate was 19.4%. CONCLUSION: These results show that FNAC of palpable breast masses in UBTH is an accurate procedure with results comparable to those from other centres and well above the minimum standards recommended internationally. It is, therefore, recommended that FNAC be done on all palpable breast masses.
  BACKGROUND: Lower mammography screening rates among minority and low income women contribute to increased morbidity and mortality from breast cancer. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of a patient navigation intervention on adherence rates to biennial screening mammography among women engaged in primary care at an inner-city academic medical center. DESIGN: Quality improvement intervention with a concurrent control group, conducted from February to November of 2008. STUDY SUBJECTS: All women in a hospital-based primary care practice aged 51-70 years. Subjects were randomized at the level of their primary care provider, such that half of the patients in the practice received the intervention, while the other half received usual care. INTERVENTIONS: Intervention subjects whose last mammogram was >18 months prior received a combination of telephone calls and reminder letters from patient navigators trained to identify barriers to care. Navigators were integrated into primary care teams and interacted directly with patients, providers, and radiology to coordinate care. Navigators utilized an electronic report to track subjects. Adherence rates to biennial mammography were assessed in intervention and control groups at baseline and post-intervention. KEY RESULTS: A total of 3,895 women were randomized to intervention (n = 1,817) and control (n = 2,078) groups. Mean age was 60, 71% were racial/ethnic minorities, 23% were non-English speaking, and 63% had public or no health insurance. At baseline, there was no difference in mammography adherence between the control and intervention groups (78%, respectively, p = 0.55). After the 9-month intervention, mammogram adherence was higher in the intervention group compared with the control group (87% vs. 76%, respectively, p < 0.001). Except among Hispanic women who demonstrated high rates in both the intervention and control groups (85% and 83%, respectively), all racial/ethnic and insurance groups demonstrated higher adherence in the intervention group. CONCLUSIONS: Patient navigation improves biennial mammography rates for inner city, low income, minority populations.
  Polymyositis (PM) is a very rare paraneoplastic syndrome in association with breast cancer, here we present a breast cancer patient with a sudden onset of respiratory failure caused by PM. A 47-year-old woman, with a history of a lump in her right breast for 3 months, weakness and anorexia for about 1 month, suddenly presented with respiratory failure and elevated muscle enzymes. Muscle biopsy revealed myositis and breast biopsy was consistent with invasive ductal breast cancer. Decreases of muscle enzyme levels were observed after corticosteroid therapy and the lumpectomy, but the patient died from respiratory failure. A case of respiratory failure caused by breast cancer associated polymyositis was presented. This case server to remind that breast cancer patients with muscle weakness or muscle enzyme elevation may be involved with PM.
  BACKGROUND: We reported a novel technique of sentinel lymph node (SLN) identification using fluorescence imaging of indocyanine green injection. Furthermore, to obtain safe and accurate identification of SLN during surgery, we introduce the image overlay navigation surgery and evaluate its efficacy. METHODS: This study enrolled 50 patients with a tumors <2 cm in diameter. Initially, we obtained three-dimensional (3-D) imaging from multidetector-row computed tomography (MD-CT) by volume rendering. It was projected on the patient's operative field with the clear visualization of lymph node (LN) through projector. Then, the dye of indocyanine green (ICG) was injected subdermally in the areola. Subcutaneous lymphatic channels draining from the areola to the axilla were visible by fluorescence imaging immediately. Lymphatic flow was reached after LN revealed on 3-D imaging. After incising the axillary skin on the point of LN mapping, SLN was then dissected under the guidance of fluorescence imaging with adequate adjustment of sensitivity and 3-D imaging. RESULTS: Lymphatic channels and SLN were successfully identified by Photodynamic eye (PDE) in all patients. And the sites of skin incision also were identical with the LN being demonstrated by 3-D imaging in all patients. The mean number of SLN was 3.7. The image overlay navigation surgery was visually easy to identify the location of SLN from the axillary skin. There were no intra- or postoperative complications associated with SLN identification. CONCLUSIONS: This combined navigations of fluorescence and 3-D imaging revealed more easy and effective to detect SLN intraoperatively than fluorescence imaging alone.
  Neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACT) in breast cancer has undergone continuous evolution over the last few decades to establish its role in the combined modality management of these tumors. The process of evolution is still far from over. Many questions are still lurking in the minds of oncologists treating breast cancer. This review analyzes the evidence from metaanlyses, major multiinstitutional prospective trials, retrospective institutional series and systematic reviews in breast cancer to determine the current standards and controversies in NACT. The most effective drugs, their advantages, issues and controversies in delivery as well as the criteria for response are reviewed. A summary of evidence-based consensus is presented and unresolved aspects are discussed.
  A new technical approach to breast-tumor detection is proposed. The technique is based on fluorescence x-ray analysis, and can identify a miniature malignant tumor within the breast. The primary beam intensity needed in fluorescence x-ray analysis is on a lower order of magnitude than that used in mammography. Thus, the newly-proposed technique would enable detection of a still tiny breast cancer while dramatically lowering the radiation dose. Field-emission x-ray sources might be a key for translating this concept into a medical technique.
  INTRODUCTION: It is widely believed that discovery of specific, sensitive, and reliable tumor biomarkers can improve the treatment of cancer. Currently, there are no obvious targets that can be used in treating triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). METHODS: To better understand TNBC and find potential biomarkers for targeted treatment, we combined a novel hydrophobic fractionation protocol with mass spectrometry LTQ-orbitrap to explore and compare the hydrophobic sub-proteome of TNBC with another subtype of breast cancer, hormone-receptor-positive-Her2-negative breast cancer (non-TNBC). RESULTS: Hydrophobic sub-proteome of breast cancer is rich in membrane proteins. Hundreds of proteins with various defined key cellular functions were identified from TNBC and non-TNBC tumors. In this study, protein profiles of TNBC and non-TNBC were systematically examined, compared, and validated. We have found that nine keratins are down-regulated and several heat shock proteins are up-regulated in TNBC tissues. Our study may provide insights of molecules that are responsible for the aggressiveness of TNBC. CONCLUSION: The initial results obtained using a combination of hydrophobic fractionation and nano-LC mass spectrometry analysis of these proteins appear promising in the discovery of potential cancer biomarkers and bio-signatures. When sufficiently refined, this approach may prove useful in improving breast cancer treatment.
  A 43-year-old woman had a pulmonary tumor detected by a computed tomographic (CT) scan during follow-up for breast cancer 15 years previously. The tumor showed a solid mass measuring 42 × 32 × 12 mm in extensive contact with the pleura of the apex of the left upper lobe. The edge of the tumor was relatively well-defined with an irregular shape, and a bubblelike area was seen within it. The longitudinal slice high-resolution CT findings showed a flat and thick mass, and its inferior border was distinct and horizontal. The pathological findings by a thoracoscopic lung biopsy showed a localized pulmonary fibrosis of the apex, a so-called pulmonary apical cap (PAC). With the recent advances in CT scan technology, the detection of PACs is very likely to increase, and they must be differentiated from superior sulcus tumors.
  Breast cancer accounts for approximately one quarter of all cancers in females. HER2 gene amplification or HER2 protein overexpression, detected in about 20% of breast carcinomas, predicts a more aggressive clinical course and determines eligibility for targeted therapy with trastuzumab. HER2 testing has become an essential part of the clinical evaluation of all breast carcinoma patients, and accurate HER2 results are critical in identifying patients who may be benefited from targeted therapy. This study investigated the concordance in the results of HER2 immunohistochemistry assays performed in 500 invasive breast carcinomas between a reference laboratory and 149 local laboratories from all geographic regions of Brazil. Our results showed an overall poor concordance (171 of 500 cases, 34.2%) regarding HER2 results between local and reference laboratories, which may be related to the low-volume load of HER2 assays, inexperience with HER2 scoring system, and/or technical issues related to immunohistochemistry in local laboratories. Standardization of HER2 testing with rigorous quality control measures by local laboratories is highly recommended to avoid erroneous treatment of breast cancer patients.
  Neutral-buffered formalin is the most commonly used tissue fixative in pathology laboratory. Among other fixatives, Bouin's solution has been used in several laboratories and is still in use for particular tissues. In this project, we determine if we can study breast clinical markers on archived Bouin-fixed tissue samples with immunohistochemistry (IHC) protocols optimized for tissue fixed in neutral-buffered formalin. To evaluate the concordance of IHC results between formalin-fixed and Bouin-fixed tissues, we calculated the concordance percentage and the κ statistic of 12 clinical IHC markers quantified by an automated system on breast cancer tissues fixed in neutral-buffered formalin and their corresponding tissues fixed in Bouin's solution. When positivity threshold of immunostaining was setup at ≥10% for both fixation conditions, we observed a concordance percentage of 83.9% (κ=0.65). However, when positivity threshold of immunostaining was lowered to 3% to 4% for Bouin-fixed tissues, concordance percentage was then of 96.8% (κ=0.92). Our data demonstrate that we can study IHC markers on archived Bouin-fixed tissue from patients with long clinical follow-up using IHC protocols optimized for formalin-fixed tissues after an adjustment of the positivity threshold of immunostaining quantified by an automated system.
  Phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN) is a negative regulator of the phosphoinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT signaling pathway that controls cell cycle progression, growth and inhibition of apoptosis. Loss of PTEN protein expression has been associated with tumorigenesis, cancer progression and drug resistance, but conflicting results exist which may be due in part to difficulties inherent in PTEN immunohistochemistry (IHC). We sought a robust PTEN IHC assay. Human tumor cell lines with PTEN status verified by copy number analysis were formalin fixed and paraffin embedded for use as positive and negative controls. PTEN antibodies were optimized on tumor cell lines. Five optimized antibodies were analyzed on 10 molecularly characterized endometrial carcinoma samples. Four antibodies (CST, Millipore, Abcam, Novus) stained 3/10 positive and 7/10 negative, however, all but CST exhibited nonspecific nucleolar staining of negative controls. One antibody (Dako) stained 5/10 positive and 5/10 negative but with areas (≤10%) of positivity. The 4 samples predicted to be negative by sequencing were negative with the CST antibody, however, one was positive with Dako; as a result we chose the CST antibody for our assay. The assay was validated on an automated platform using 50 formalin fixed and paraffin embedded colon, lung, prostate and breast adenocarcinoma cases. Tumor cell lines served as external controls; endothelial cells and peripheral nerves served as internal positive controls. Dichotomous scoring achieved 100% concordance between three independent pathologists. This reproducible PTEN assay (PREZEON&!trade;) has been implemented in a CLIA certified laboratory.
  BACKGROUND: In breast cancer, vascular endothelial growth factor C, transforming growth factor β, placental growth factor, and fibroblast growth factor (acidic and basic) promote angiogenesis and metastases. We tested the hypothesis that a propofol-paravertebral anesthetic (PPA) technique would attenuate postoperative changes in these angiogenic factors to a greater extent than balanced general anesthesia (GA) and morphine analgesia in women undergoing surgery for primary breast cancer. METHOD:: Forty women with primary breast cancer undergoing surgical excision were randomized to receive either standard GA or PPA technique. Venous blood was sampled before and at 24 h after surgery and serum analyzed. The primary endpoint was a preoperative versus postoperative change in vascular endothelial growth factor C and transforming growth factor β concentrations. RESULTS:: Using a visual analog scale (median [25-75% interquartile range]), PPA patients (1 [0-2]) had less pain at 2 h (P = 0.02) than did GA patients (3 [2-5]). The mean postoperative change in vascular endothelial growth factor C concentrations among GA patients was 733 versus 27 pg/ml for PPA patients (difference, 706 [97.5% CI, 280-1,130] pg/ml, P = 0.001). In contrast, the mean postoperative change in transforming growth factor β concentration among GA patients was -163 versus 146 pg/ml for PPA patients (difference, 309 [97.5% CI, -474 to -143] pg/ml, P = 0.005). Concentrations of placental growth factor and fibroblast growth factor, both acidic and basic, were undetectable in serum. CONCLUSION:: Anesthetic technique influences serum concentrations of factors associated with angiogenesis in primary breast cancer surgery.
  Due to the small volume and high density of breast tissue in Asian women, particularly younger women, mammographic diagnosis is sometimes non-conclusive, with a Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS) result of 0. No alternative based on blood biomarkers has yet succeeded in discriminating between patients with breast cancer (BC) and those with benign breast disease (BBD) among BI-RADS 0 patients. In our study, 84 BC and 94 BBD patients with mammographic results and confirmed pathologic information were enrolled and categorized into two groups, namely, 79 BC and 73 BBD patients with BI-RADS 1-5 and 5 BC and 21 BBD patients with BI-RADS 0. RNA extracted from peripheral blood samples collected in PAXgene(™) tubes was analyzed after NuGEN WT-Ovation(™) RNA amplification using Affymetrix GeneChip(®) HG-U133 Plus 2.0 arrays to explore the gene expression repertoire in peripheral blood samples. A 28-gene panel was selected that was capable of correctly discriminating BC from BBD patients. Using this 28-gene panel, we correctly classified 88% of the samples using BI-RADS 1-5 as the training set and correctly predicted 73% of the samples in testing for BI-RADS 0. This study shows that a peripheral blood mRNA signature can help discriminate breast cancer from benign breast diseases, particularly in patients with non-conclusive mammography.
  Lower levels of global DNA methylation in white blood cell (WBC) DNA have been associated with adult cancers. It is unknown whether individuals with a family history of cancer also have lower levels of global DNA methylation early in life. We examined global DNA methylation in WBC (measured in three repetitive elements, LINE1, Sat2 and Alu, by MethyLight and in LINE1 by pyrosequencing) in 51 girls aged 6-17 years. Compared to girls without a family history of breast cancer, methylation levels were lower for all assays in girls with a family history of breast cancer and statistically significantly lower for Alu and LINE1 pyrosequencing. After adjusting for age, body mass index (BMI) and Tanner stage, only methylation in Alu was associated with family history of breast cancer. If these findings are replicated in larger studies, they suggest that lower levels of global WBC DNA methylation observed later in life in adults with cancer may also be present early in life in children with a family history of cancer.
  Adaptive responses within hypoxic tumor microenvironments require the altered expression of Solute Carrier (SLC) transporters to maintain nutrient uptake in support of cellular metabolism and biosynthesis. Using a real time PCR array strategy to further characterize changes in transporter expression within a chronic hypoxia breast cancer cell line model (BT474), we have found a 31 fold increase in the expression of the thiamine transporter, SLC19A3. Thus, further investigations into the expression changes of the thiamine transporters, SLC19A2 and SLC19A3, and the role of hypoxia inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1α) regulating their expression were conducted. Chronic culturing of BT474 cells in 1% O(2) up to 142 days consistently demonstrated a high level of SLC19A3 expression with a mean of approximately 40 fold with no change in SLC19A2. A corresponding 2 fold increase in thiamine uptake over 15 min was measured in chronic hypoxic BT474 cells compared to normoxia. Acute 1% O(2) exposure of BT474 cells up to 72 h demonstrated a 7.5 fold increase in SLC19A3 expression. The chemical hypoxia mimetic deferoxamine, resulted in an approximately 70 fold increase in SLC19A3 expression. Stable shRNA knockdown of HIF-1α reduced hypoxia mediated SLC19A3 upregulation by approximately 3 fold compared to scrambled construct. In conclusion, SLC19A3 transporter expression was observed to be upregulated under acute, chronic and DFO induced hypoxia. The attenuated increase in SLC19A3 expression after HIF-1α knockdown suggests a role for HIF-1α mediated pathways regulating SLC19A3 gene expression.
  RhoBTB2 or Deleted in Breast Cancer 2 (DBC2), identified as a candidate tumor suppressor gene for breast cancer and other human malignancies, is an atypical member of a novel gene family encoding small GTPases. In this study, we found that ectopic expression of RhoBTB2 resulted in inhibition of migration and invasion of human metastatic breast cancer cells line both MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435 with a dose-dependent manner. Western blotting analysis revealed that ectopic expression of RhoBTB2 induced a significant increase of breast cancer metastasis suppressor BRMS1. siRNA suppression of BRMS1 expression reversed markedly the inhibitory effects of RhoBTB2 on migration and invasion abilities of both MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435 cells. Ezrin is a member of the ezrin-radixin-moesin cytoskeleton-associated protein family and is a key signaling molecule that regulates cancer migration and invasion. Western blotting analysis demonstrated that ectopic expression of RhoBTB2 resulted in decreased phosphorylations of ezrin and Akt2 in both MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435 cells. Therefore, we concluded that upregulation of breast cancer metastasis suppressor BRMS1 and downregulation of phosphorylation of cancer metastasis-related gene ezrin contributed to RhoBTB2-induced inhibition of metastatic breast carcinoma cell migration and invasion. Our findings suggest that understanding RhoBTB2-mediated migration and invasion suppression is critical to the development of new therapies designed to prevent and treat patients with breast cancer metastasis.
  The activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) gene is induced by a variety of signals, including many of those encountered by cancer cells. We present evidence that ATF3 is induced by TGFβ in the MCF10CA1a breast cancer cells and plays an integral role for TGFβ to upregulate its target genes snail, slug and twist, and to enhance cell motility. Furthermore, ATF3 upregulates the expression of the TGFb gene itself, forming a positive-feedback loop for TGFβ signaling. Functionally, ectopic expression of ATF3 leads to morphological changes and alterations of markers consistent with epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). It also leads to features associated with breast-cancer-initiating cells: increased CD24(low)-CD44(high) population of cells, mammosphere formation and tumorigenesis. Conversely, knockdown of ATF3 reduces EMT, CD24(low)-CD44(high) cells and mammosphere formation. Importantly, knocking down twist, a downstream target, reduces the ability of ATF3 to enhance mammosphere formation, indicating the functional significance of twist in ATF3 action. To our knowledge, this is the first report demonstrating the ability of ATF3 to enhance breast cancer-initiating cell features and to feedback on TGFβ. Because ATF3 is an adaptive-response gene and is induced by various stromal signals, these findings have significant implications for how the tumor microenvironment might affect cancer development.
  Research has led to greater understanding of what is needed to create and sustain well-functioning public health partnerships. However, a partnership's ability to foster an environment that encourages broad member involvement in discussions, decision making, and activities has received scant empirical attention. This study examined the relationship between partnership members' perceptions of how well leadership and management facilitated their involvement, and their satisfaction with their role and influence within the partnership. Data came from 60 individuals who participated in two waves of a quantitative process evaluation of six southern interorganizational partnerships, formed as part of a national pilot project to increase cervical and breast cancer screening rates. Results suggested that environments fostering broad partner involvement were associated with measures of member satisfaction, controlling for other partnership characteristics. Findings indicated that facilitation of member involvement deserves increased consideration from researchers and practitioners as an indicator of the quality of partnership functioning.
  The role of the calcium- and phospholipid-binding protein annexin I (ANXA1) in cell cycle regulation has been investigated in estrogen receptor (ER)-positive MCF-7 and ER-negative MDA-MB-231 breast tumor cell lines. In MCF-7 cells, ANXA1-targeting small interfering RNA (siRNA) reduced ANXA1 mRNA and protein levels and attenuated cell proliferation induced by FCS, estradiol, or epidermal growth factor. Well-characterized agonists for the known ANXA1 receptor, FPR2, including the ANXA1 N-terminal proteolytic product ANXA1(2-26), lipoxin A(4) (LXA(4)), and the synthetic peptide, Trp-Lys-Tyr-Met-Val-D-Met (WKYMVm), stimulated proliferation of MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells that was attenuated by incubation with FPR2 antagonists WRW(4) (1 μ M) or Boc2 (100 nM) or by siRNA against FPR2. FCS-induced mitogenic responses were attenuated by each of the FPR antagonists and by siRNA against FPR2 and, to a lesser extent, FPR1. LXA(4) increased phosphorylation of Akt, p70(S6K) but not ERK1/2. Increases in cyclin D1 protein induced by FCS or LXA(4) were blocked by the PI3 kinase inhibitor, LY294002, and attenuated by FPR2 antagonism using Boc2. In invasive breast cancer, immunohistochemistry revealed the presence of ANXA1 and its receptor, FPR2, in both tumor epithelium and stromal cells. These observations suggest a novel signaling role for ANXA1 in mitogen-activated proliferation of breast tumor epithelial cells that is mediated via activation of FPR1 and FPR2.-Khau, T., Langenbach, S. Y., Schuliga, M., Harris, T., Johnstone, C. N., Anderson, R. L., Stewart, A. G. Annexin-1 signals mitogen-stimulated breast tumor cell proliferation by activation of the formyl peptide receptors (FPRs) 1 and 2.
  Abstract Long-term outcomes and hence the role of adjuvant therapy in patients with small (≤1 cm), node-negative breast cancer remain unclear. This study's objective was to evaluate whether human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER)-2 status is an independent, poor prognostic marker in patients with these tumors and to identify a subgroup of patients with these small tumors who might benefit from adjuvant systemic therapy. All patients with a diagnosis of a node-negative breast tumor measuring ≤1 cm and available HER-2 test results between January 1, 2001, and December 31, 2005, at the three Mayo Clinic sites were identified. Clinicopathologic data were compared in three groups: HER-2(-), HER-2(+), and triple-negative (TN) tumors. Of the 421 tumors identified, 364 (86.5%) were HER-2(-), 28 (6.7%) were HER-2(+), and 29 (6.9%) were TN. The median follow-up time was 1,015 days (range, 1-2,549 days). Groups were balanced in terms of patient age and tumor histology. Eleven patients with HER-2(-) tumors (3.0%), seven with HER-2(+) tumors (25.0%), and eight with TN tumors (27.6%) received adjuvant chemotherapy. Follow-up data were available for 357, 28, and 28 patients in the three groups, respectively. Death rates in the three groups were 6.4% (23 of 357) (one recurrence-related death), 0% (0 of 28), and 7.1% (2 of 28) (one recurrence-related death), respectively. During follow-up, the tumor recurred in nine patients: four were HER-2(-) tumors (1.1%), two were HER-2(+) tumors (7.1%), and three were TN tumors (10.7%). Patients with small, node-negative breast tumors have an excellent prognosis, but HER-2(+) and TN tumors appear to have a higher recurrence rate, warranting consideration for broad use and optimization of systemic adjuvant treatments.
  Abstract Purpose. The purpose of this article was to examine the relationship between age and lymph node ratio (LNR, number of positive nodes divided by number of examined nodes), and to determine their effects on breast cancer (BC) and overall mortality. Methods. Women aged ≥50 years, diagnosed in 1988-1997 with a unilateral histologically confirmed T1-T2 node positive surgically treated primary nonmetastatic BC, were selected from the National Cancer Institute's Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER). Generalized Additive Models for Location Scale and Shape (GAMLSS) were used to evaluate the age-LNR relationship. Cumulative incidence functions and multivariate competing risks analysis based on model selection by the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) were used to examine the effect of age and LNR on mortality. Low LNR was defined as ≤0.20, mid-LNR 0.21-0.65, and high LNR >0.65. Results. GAMLSS showed a nonlinear LNR-age relationship, increasing from mean LNR 0.26-0.28 at age 50-70 years to 0.30 at 80 years and 0.40 at 90 years. Compared with a 9.8% [95% confidence interval (CI) 8.8%-10.8%] risk of BC death at 5 years in women aged 50-59 years with low LNR, the risk in women ≥80 years with low LNR was 12.6% [95% CI 10.1%-15.0%], mid-LNR 18.1% [13.9%-22.1%], high LNR 29.8% [22.7%-36.1%]. Five-years overall risk of death increased from 40.8% [37.5%-43.9%] by low LNR to 67.4% [61.4%-72.4%] by high LNR. The overall mortality hazard ratio for age ≥80 years with high LNR was 7.49 [6.54-8.59], as compared with women aged 50-59 years with low LNR. Conclusion. High LNR combined with older age was associated with a threefold increased risk of BC death and a sevenfold increased hazard ratio of overall mortality.
  BACKGROUND: We examined whether mammographic density predicts risk of second breast cancers among patients with ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS). METHODS: The study included DCIS patients diagnosed during 1990 to 1997 and treated with breast-conserving surgery at Kaiser Permanente Northern California. Medical records were reviewed for clinical factors and subsequent breast cancers (DCIS and invasive). Ipsilateral mammograms from the index DCIS were assessed for density without knowledge of subsequent cancer status. Cox regression modeling was used to examine the association between mammographic density and risk of breast cancer events. RESULTS: Of the 935 eligible DCIS patients, 164 (18%) had a subsequent ipsilateral breast cancer, and 59 (6%) had a new primary cancer in the contralateral breast during follow-up (median, 103 mo). Those with the greatest total area of density (upper 20% of values) were at increased risk for invasive disease in either breast [hazard ratio (HR), 2.1; 95% confidence interval (95% CI), 1.2-3.8] or any cancer (DCIS or invasive) in the ipsilateral (HR, 1.7; 95% CI, 1.0-2.9) or contralateral (HR, 3.0; 95% CI, 1.3-6.9) breast compared with those with the smallest area of density (bottom 20%). HRs for these same end points comparing those in the highest with those in the lowest American College of Radiology Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System category were 1.6 (95% CI, 0.7-3.6), 1.3 (95% CI, 0.7-2.6), and 5.0 (95% CI, 1.4-17.9), respectively. There was a suggestion of increasing risk of contralateral, but not ipsilateral, cancer with increasing percent density. CONCLUSIONS: Women with mammographically dense breasts may be at higher risk of subsequent breast cancer, especially in the contralateral breast. IMPACT: Information about mammographic density may help with DCIS treatment decisions.
  Signal transducing adaptor protein-2 (STAP-2) is a recently identified adaptor protein, which contains pleckstrin homology (PH) and Src homology 2 (SH2)-like domains, as well as a signal transducer and an activator of transcription 3 (STAT3)-binding motif in its C-terminal region. STAP-2 is also a substrate of breast tumor kinase (Brk). In breast cancers, Brk expression is deregulated and it promotes STAT3-dependent cell proliferation. In the present study, manipulated STAP-2 expression demonstrated essential roles of STAP-2 in Brk-mediated STAT3 activation. STAP-2 interacts with both Brk and STAT3. In addition, small-interfering RNA-mediated reduction of endogenous STAP-2 expression strongly decreased Brk-mediated STAT3 activation in T47D breast cancer cells. The PH domain of STAP-2 is involved in multiple steps; the binding between Brk and STAP-2, the activation and tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT3, and the activation of Brk. Notably, a STAP-2 PH-Brk fusion protein exhibited robust kinase activity and increased activation and tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT3. Finally, STAP-2-knockdown in T47D cells induced a significant decrease of proliferation, as strong as that of Brk- or STAT3-knockdown. Taken together, our findings are likely to inform the development of a novel therapeutic strategy, as well as the determination of novel prognostic values, in breast carcinomas.
  BACKGROUND: There are no reliable and valid instruments in Mexico for breast cancer patients. Our objective was to measure reliability and validity of a Spanish version of the FACT-B (Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy-Breast) questionnaire in Mexican population. METHODS: The translation of the questionnaire was reviewed and minor changes were made. The instrument was applied to 142 patients recently diagnosed with breast cancer. It was applied to 105 for the second time, and to 75 for the third time. An analysis of item discrimination was made. The questionnaire's reliability was determined by Cronbach's alpha. Concurrent validity was determined by an analysis of correlations between the instrument's scales and EORTC's QLQ C-30 y BR-23 scales. RESULTS: The five FACT-B subscales were reliable, their alpha coefficients varied between 0.65 and 0.82. The entire scale obtained a value of 0.87. The correlation analysis between FACT-B and EORTC QLQ C-30 subscales indicated that the same construct was being evaluated. CONCLUSIONS: FACT-B is a valid, reliable and sensitive instrument to measuring quality life in Mexican breast cancer patients.
  INTRODUCTION: Basic research has indicated that tocotrienols have potent antiproliferative and proapoptotic effects that would be expected to reduce the effect of breast cancer. METHODS: We conducted a double-blinded, placebo-controlled pilot trial to test the effectiveness of adjuvant tocotrienol therapy in combination with tamoxifen for five years in women with early breast cancer. Two-hundred-forty women, aged between 40-60 years, with either tumor node metastases (TNM) Stage I or II breast cancer and estrogen receptor (ER) positive tumors were non-randomly assigned to two groups. The intervention group received tocotrienol rich fraction (TRF) plus tamoxifen whilst the control group received placebo plus tamoxifen, for five years. RESULTS: During the five years of study, 8 patients died due to breast cancer while 36 patients developed local or systemic recurrence. Five-year breast cancer specific survival was 98.3% (95% confidence interval (CI): 95.9% to 100%) in the intervention group and 95%, (95% CI: 91.1% to 98.9%) in the control group, while 5-years disease free survival was 86.7% (95% CI: 80.6% to 92.8%) and 83.3% (95% CI: 76.6% to 90.0%), respectively. Risk of mortality due to breast cancer was 60% (HR: 0.40; 95% CI: 0.08 to 2.05) lower in the intervention group versus the controls following adjustment for age, ethnicity, stage and lymph node status but this was not statistically significant. Adjuvant TRF therapy was not associated with breast cancer recurrence (HR: 0.84; 95% CI: 0.43-1.65). CONCLUSIONS: From the current study, there seems to be no association between adjuvant tocotrienol therapy and breast cancer specific survival in women with early breast cancer. Trial registration: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01157026.
  BACKGROUND: Activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM) is implicated in the prognosis of multiple cancers with low level expression associated with metastasis and early death in breast cancer. Despite this significance, mechanisms that regulate ALCAM gene expression and ALCAM's role in adhesion of pre-metastatic circulating tumor cells have not been defined. We studied ALCAM expression in 20 tumor cell lines by real-time PCR, western blot and immunochemistry. Epigenetic alterations of the ALCAM promoter were assessed using methylation-specific PCR and bisulfite sequencing. ALCAM's role in adhesion of tumor cells to the vascular wall was studied in isolated perfused lungs. RESULTS: A common site for transcription initiation of the ALCAM gene was identified and the ALCAM promoter sequenced. The promoter contains multiple cis-active elements including a functional p65 NF-Kappa B motif, and it harbors an extensive array of CpG residues highly methylated exclusively in ALCAM-negative tumor cells. These CpG residues were modestly demethylated after 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine treatment. Restoration of high-level ALCAM expression using an ALCAM cDNA increased clustering of MDA-MB-435 tumor cells perfused through the pulmonary vasculature of ventilated rat lungs. Anti-ALCAM antibodies reduced the number of intravascular tumor cell clusters. CONCLUSION: Our data suggests that loss of ALCAM expression, due in part to DNA methylation of extensive segments of the promoter, significantly impairs the ability of circulating tumor cells to adhere to each other, and may therefore promote metastasis. These findings offer insight into the mechanisms for down-regulation of ALCAM gene expression in tumor cells, and for the positive prognostic value of high-level ALCAM in breast cancer.
  INTRODUCTION: Tyrosine phosphorylated signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (pStat3) is present in numerous cancers and is required for mediating tumorigenesis. Autocrine and paracrine interleukin (IL)-6 signaling is the principal mechanism by which Stat3 is persistently phosphorylated in epithelial tumors including breast, lung, colon and gastric cancer. The Ras oncogene mediates cellular transformation without evidence of pStat3 in cultured cells. Recently, however non-tyrosine phosphorylated Stat3 was shown to have a transcriptional activating function, a role in mitochondrial function and to mediate cell migration.. Here we examined the role of Stat3 in Ras mediated transformation. METHODS: Ha-rasV12 transformed mammary epithelial cells (MCF10A) cells were transduced with a Stat3shRNA, IL-6shRNA and/or treated with inhibitors of Janus kinases (JAKs) to examine the role of the IL-6 signaling pathway in Ras mediated invasion and tumorigenesis. RESULTS: Cellular migration, invasion, anchorage independent growth and tumorigenesis were largely abrogated in the Stat3-reduced cells compared to control cells. Analysis of MCF10A-Ras tumors revealed high levels of pStat3 and interleukin-6. Tumors derived from transgenic MMTV-K-Ras mice were also found to express pStat3 and IL-6. MCF10A-Ras cells, when grown in a three-dimensional Matrigel culture system revealed the appearance of the junctional protein E-Cadherin as a consequence of reducing Stat3 levels or inhibiting Stat3 activity. Decreasing IL-6 levels in the MCF10A-Ras cells abrogated tumorigenesis and reduced cell migration. By isolating Ras-expressing primary tumors and serially passaging these cells in two-dimensional culture led to a decrease in IL-6 and pStat3 levels with the reappearance of E-Cadherin. CONCLUSIONS: The cellular and environmental context can lead to differential IL-6/pStat3 signaling and a dependency on this cytokine and transcription factor for migration, invasion and tumorigenesis.
  Lysyl oxidase (LOX) is an extracellular enzyme critical for the cross-linking of collagens and elastin. The LOX gene has also been shown to inhibit the transforming activity of Ras oncogene signaling. Recently, a single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of LOX G473A (rs1800449) has been demonstrated to be associated with increased risk of breast cancer in African American women. In this hospital-based case&#x2013;control study, the association of LOX polymorphism with breast cancer susceptibility in Chinese Han population was investigated. In total, 238 female patients with breast cancer and 234 age-matched healthy controls recruited were genotyped. We found a significant difference in the frequency of the LOX G473A genotype between the breast cancer and control groups. Individuals with GA genotype showed a 2.79-fold (95% confidence interval&#x2009;=&#x2009;1.87&#x2013;4.16) increased risk of breast cancer compared with subjects carrying GG genotype (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001). Further statistical analysis revealed that this polymorphism was an independent parameter with regard to other variables that are significantly associated with breast cancer, that is, age, menopausal status, estrogen exposure interval, expression status of estrogen receptor, and progesterone receptor. These findings suggest that the LOX 473 GA genotype is independently associated with increased risk of breast cancer in Chinese female population.
  Mucinous infiltrating invasive ductal adenocarcinoma consists of 2&#x2013;4% invasive breast cancer, but is a very interesting type due to its macroscopic similarity to non-special-type (NST) ductal carcinoma. The macroscopic similarity of mucinous and infiltrating ductal carcinoma NST adenocarcinomas consists of a loose and edematous stroma, which is often seen in portions of NST carcinoma and may mimic the mucin pools of mucinous carcinoma. In this study the authors examined the ultrastructural differences between mucinous carcinoma and infiltrating ductal carcinoma NST. They also examined the protein expression of the tissues by 2D electrophoresis due to their belief that from the results of these two levels it is possible to understand the changes that take place both in the ultrastructural and biochemical levels in these two types of breast cancer. The ultrastructural results from mucinous carcinoma have shown many changes in cytoplasmic organelles in comparison to normal samples, depending on the grade and the number of metastatic lymph nodes. At the 2D elecrophoresis level the authors studied two interesting polypeptides, calreticulin and thioredoxin. Both of these proteins were found in patterns of fibroadenoma, mucinous carcinoma, and NST carcinoma, but with different quantitative expression among them. In the future the quantitative differences of these two proteins may provide specific tumor markers for these two types of carcinoma.
  Semiconducting polymer dots (Pdots) represent a new class of ultrabright fluorescent probes for biological imaging. They exhibit several important characteristics for experimentally demanding in vitro and in vivo fluorescence studies, such as their high brightness, fast emission rate, excellent photostability, nonblinking, and nontoxic feature. However, controlling the surface chemistry and bioconjugation of Pdots has been a challenging problem that prevented their widespread applications in biological studies. Here, we report a facile yet powerful conjugation method that overcomes this challenge. Our strategy for Pdot functionalization is based on entrapping heterogeneous polymer chains into a single dot, driven by hydrophobic interactions during nanoparticle formation. A small amount of amphiphilic polymer bearing functional groups is co-condensed with the majority of semiconducting polymers to modify and functionalize the nanoparticle surface for subsequent covalent conjugation to biomolecules, such as streptavidin and immunoglobulin G (IgG). The Pdot bioconjugates can effectively and specifically label cellular targets, such as cell surface marker in human breast cancer cells, without any detectable nonspecific binding. Single-particle imaging, cellular imaging, and flow cytometry experiments indicate a much higher fluorescence brightness of Pdots compared to those of Alexa dye and quantum dot probes. The successful bioconjugation of these ultrabright nanoparticles presents a novel opportunity to apply versatile semiconducting polymers to various fluorescence measurements in modern biology and biomedicine.
  OBJECTIVE: To explore the immune response induced by HER2/neu oncogene in the breast cancer (BC) carcinogenesis process and the immunological mechanism of Ru'ai Shuhou Recipe (RSR) in the prevention and treatment of BC. METHODS: HER2/neu transgenic spontaneous breast tumor model mice were fed with RSR from 5 weeks old, the occurrence of breast tumor in them was observed, and the changes of T cell-mediated immune response and associated cytokines were detected during the carcinogenesis process, i. e., when mice aged between 15 and 25 weeks. RESULTS: RSR showed significant effects in postponing and reducing the carcinogenesis of primary breast tumor, up-regulating the amount of T cell in splenic lymphocyte in tumor-bearing mice, promoting the proliferation of T lymphocyte, and inducing the secretion of cytokines such as interleukin-2, interleukin-12 and interferon-y. CONCLUSIONS: A serial immune response reveals in the carcinogenesis process. The immunologic function of HER-2/neu transgenic mice is significantly different to that of the same strain non-transgenic mice. Effect of RSR in preventing and postponing breast cancer carcinogenesis is possibly realized through enhancing the anti-tumor immune response of transgenic mice themselves.
  Splenic metastases are rare. Usually, they are part of a disseminated disease and located on the splenic capsule. Common sources are breast cancer, lung cancer and malignant melanoma. SoLitary splenic metastases are rare, usuaLLy located in the splenic parenchyma and metastasizing via the hematogenous route. Splenic metastases from ovarian carcinoma are usuaLly part of a disseminated disease, located on the splenic capsule and metastasize via the peritoneum. Splenic metastases from endometriaL carcinoma are usuaLLy solitary, Located in the splenic parenchyma and metastasize via the hematogenous route. Splenic metastases from cervical carcinoma are divided equally between metastases as part of a disseminated disease and soLitary metastases. Less than 100 cases of solitary splenic metastases have been reported with half of them being metastases from female genital tract malignancies: 30--ovarian carcinoma; 11--endometriaL carcinoma; 8--cervical carcinoma; and 1--tubal carcinoma. Few cases have been reported of splenic rupture because of metastases from choriocarcinoma. Splenic metastases as part of a disseminated disease are associated with poor prognosis, and splenectomy--apart from cases in which it might assist in achieving optimaL debulking--is not effective. Solitary splenic metastases represent a more moderate disease and the treatment of choice is splenectomy. SoLitary splenic metastases may be detected after an interval from the diagnosis of the primary disease. Hence, patients who had been treated for female genital tract malignancy, even if they are asymptomatic, need a long-term follow-up, including serial imaging studies of the spleen.
  BACKGROUND: HER2 is an important prognostic and predictive marker in invasive breast cancer. It is currently assessed by immunohistochemistry for protein over-expression and by fluorescence in situ hybridization for gene amplification. The immunohistochemistry-equivocal cases (2+) are currently retested by FISH to determine eligibility for trastuzumab treatment. Retesting by FISH significantly raises the cost of patient management and sometimes delays treatment. The 4B5 is a new, FDA-approved, rabbit monoclonal antibody for HER2 testing. OBJECTIVES: To examine the reliability of 4B5 IHC HER2 testing in cases found by CB11 IHC to be HER2 status equivocal. METHODS: Twenty-eight invasive breast cancer cases, with an equivocal HER2 status by CB11 IHC, were retested by the 4B5 antibody as well as by FISH analysis. The scoring was performed using the same guidelines as HercepTest and was correlated with the FISH ratio. RESULTS: Of the original 28 CB11 clone designated equivocal cases, 14 (50%) showed negative HER2 staining using the 4B5 clone (HercepTest score 0 and 1+). Five cases (18%) proved to be positive (HercepTest score 3+) and 9 cases (32%) remained equivocal (HercepTest score 2+). The corresponding FISH ratio results showed that all 4B5 negative cases were negative by FISH testing, with a negative predictive value of 100%; 4 of 5 of the 4B5-positive cases were positive by FISH testing, with a positive predictive value of 80%. One 4B5-positive case was borderline-high (2.2 ratio) by FISH. The correlation between 4B5 IHC and FISH was statistically significant (P = 0.0013) by chi-square test. CONCLUSIONS: Sequential testing by 4B5 IHC could greatly reduce the need for FISH testing in cases considered HER2 equivocal by CB11 IHC.
  Efrapeptins (EF), a family of fungal peptides, inhibit proteasomal enzymatic activities and the in vitro and in vivo growth of HT-29 cells. They are also known inhibitors of F(1)F(0)-ATPase, a mitochondrial enzyme that functions as an Hsp90 co-chaperone. We have previously shown that treatment of cancer cells with EF results in disruption of the Hsp90:F(1)F(0)-ATPase complex and inhibition of Hsp90 chaperone activity. The present study examines the effect of EF on breast cancer growth in vitro and in vivo. As a monotherapy, EF inhibited cell proliferation in vitro with an IC(50) value ranging from 6 nM to 3.4 μM. Inhibition of Hsp90 chaperone function appeared to be the dominant mechanism of action and the factor determining cellular sensitivity to EF. In vitro inhibition of proteasome became prominent in the absence of adequate levels of Hsp90 and F(1)F(0)-ATPase as in the case of the relatively EF-resistant MDA-MB-231 cell line. In vivo, EF inhibited MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 xenograft growth with a maximal inhibition of 60% after administration of 0.15 and 0.3 mg/kg EF, respectively. 2-Deoxyglucose (2DG), a known inhibitor of glycolysis, acted synergistically with EF in vitro and antagonistically in vivo. In vitro, the synergistic effect was attributed to a prolonged endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. In vivo, the antagonistic effect was ascribed to the downregulation of tumoral and/or stromal F(1)F(0)-ATPase by 2DG.
  The majority of cell culture studies have assessed the effect of hormones on cancer cell growth using media supplemented with charcoal-treated fetal bovine serum (CTS). We aimed to determine whether using a system more reflective of the human condition by changing the charcoal-treated serum to an untreated pooled human serum (PHS) resulted in the same hormone responses in breast and prostate cell lines. MCF-7 breast cancer, MCF-10A non-transformed breast, and LNCaP prostate cancer cell lines supplemented with PHS were treated with high and low physiological concentrations of six hormones (17β-estradiol, dehydroepiandosterone (DHEA), dihydrotestosterone (DHT), testosterone, insulin, and glucagon). Cell growth was measured after 72 h of incubation. All hormones stimulated growth of MCF-7 cells (p < 0.05). MCF-10A cell growth was inhibited by DHEA, DHT, and testosterone (p < 0.05), unaffected by 17β-estradiol and glucagon, and stimulated by insulin (p < 0.05). LNCaP cell growth was stimulated by the highest concentration of DHEA and DHT (p < 0.05) and inhibited by the highest concentration of 17β-estradiol (p < 0.05), while insulin and testosterone, had no effect. Overall, PHS lowered the magnitude of the effect of hormones on cell growth in comparison to CTS. Due to the presence of all serum constituents, our model represents a more appropriate physiological environment for determining the effect of hormones on cancer cell growth. Further studies are required to determine the mechanisms by which added hormones interact with the constituents of untreated human serum.
  Non-breast-cancer deaths currently account for almost half of deaths among breast carcinoma patients in the 15 years following diagnosis. Understanding the trends of non-breast-cancer death is vital for calibrating treatment and survival expectations, and for understanding the consequences of potentially toxic therapies. To observe trends over time in non-breast-cancer relative survival-the non-breast-cancer survival rates of breast cancer patients relative to the non-breast-cancer survival rates of the population as a whole, matched for gender, race, age, region, and year of diagnosis. Non-breast-cancer relative survival between breast carcinoma patients and the general population was measured using SEER public-use data of patients diagnosed with breast carcinoma between 1973 and 2007. Non-breast-cancer relative survival improved significantly from 1973 to the present. From 1986 onward, the non-breast-cancer survival rate among breast carcinoma patients is equal to, or slightly higher than, matched populations who did not have breast carcinoma. This improvement over time occurred across almost all patient stratifications, including race, age, tumor size, and nodal status. However, patients receiving full mastectomies, and patients not receiving radiotherapy experienced no increase in relative survival. The most dramatic relative survival improvements occurred in patients who received radiation and patients receiving partial mastectomies, and such improvements were seen even after controlling for changes in tumor size over time. Non-breast-cancer relative survival among breast carcinoma patients has improved significantly since 1973; breast cancer patients are currently no more likely to die of other causes than the general population.
  Male breast cancer (MBC) is an uncommon disease with a frequency of approximately one in 1000. Due to the rarity of MBC, it is understudied and its etiology is poorly understood. Our objectives are to determine the frequency of pathogenic mutations in BRCA2 and PALB2 in MBC cases and to investigate the correlations between mutation status and cancer phenotypes. Single strand conformation polymorphism analysis, direct sequencing, and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification were employed to screen for mutations in the BRCA2 gene, followed by direct sequencing of the PALB2 gene in BRCA2-negative MBC cases. Pathogenic BRCA2 mutations were identified in 18 of the 115 MBC cases, including four of the ten cases (40%) from breast cancer families and 14 of the 105 cases (13%) unselected for family history of breast cancer. The difference in BRCA2-mutation frequencies between cases with and without family history of breast cancer was not statistically significant (P = 0.145), suggesting that family history is not a strong predictor of carrying a mutation in males. We observed a highly significant association of carrying a pathogenic BRCA2 mutation with high tumor grade (P < 0.001) and a weak association with positive lymph nodes (P < 0.02). Of the 97 BRCA2-negative MBC cases, we identified one PALB2 mutation with confirmed pathogenicity and one mutation predicted to be pathogenic, a prevalence of pathogenic PALB2-mutation of 1-2%. Based on our results and previous studies, genetic testing for BRCA2 should be recommended for any diagnosed MBC case, regardless of family history of breast cancer.

  OBJECTIVE: To investigate the potential association between domestic exposure to light at night (LAN) and the risk of human breast cancer. METHODS: A case-control study of female breast cancer was conducted in Connecticut. A total of 363 incident breast cancer cases and 356 age frequency-matched controls were interviewed using a standardized, structured questionnaire to obtain information on sleeping patterns and bedroom light environment. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated by unconditional multivariate logistic regression. RESULTS: A non-significantly increased risk of breast cancer was observed among postmenopausal women for those keeping lights on while sleeping (OR = 1.4, 95% CI 0.7, 2.7), those who reported mainly sleeping in the daytime (OR = 1.4, 95% CI 0.5, 4.3), and those not drawing the curtains/window shades while sleeping at night (OR = 1.2, 95% CI 0.8, 1.9). CONCLUSION: The results from this study suggest a potential increased risk of breast cancer associated with domestic exposure to LAN. Further studies with larger sample size are needed to confirm the results.
  PURPOSE: Prophylactic lamivudine to prevent chemotherapy-induced hepatitis B virus (HBV) reactivation has been widely adopted in hematological cancer patients. We examined the deferred preemptive strategy, upon rising viremia, in breast cancer (BC) patients based on sensitive serum HBV DNA level monitoring in a non-randomized controlled study. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Baseline virological profiles before cytotoxic chemotherapy were retrospectively analyzed in historical BC and non-BC patients. A prospective cohort study, including 22 early BC patients (Group I) who were hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)± and required adjuvant chemotherapy, were enrolled and had deferred preemptive use of lamivudine upon viremic surge. During the study period, another 23 BC patients, who did not participate in the abovementioned study, received prophylactic use of lamivudine as routine practice (Group 2). Chemotherapy-induced hepatitis events and the lamivudine treatment course were compared. RESULTS: There was no significant difference in the incidence of hepatitis during chemotherapy between these two groups. Patients in Group I had statistically significant shorter duration of lamivudine use during chemotherapy. However, once lamivudine had been initiated, the treatment course is not significantly shorter than those patients given prophylactically. CONCLUSIONS: Deferred preemptive strategy is feasible to control HBV replication and prevent its reactivation in BC patients undergoing chemotherapy. However, it may not be superior to prophylactic strategy and clinically practical.
  Active targeting of a drug carrier to a specific target site is crucial to provide a safe and efficient delivery of therapeutics and imaging contrast agents. E-selectin expression is induced on the endothelial cell surface of vessels in response to inflammatory stimuli but is absent in the normal vessels. Thus, E-selectin is an attractive molecular target, and high affinity ligands for E-selectin could be powerful tools for the delivery of therapeutics and/or imaging agents to inflamed vessels. In this study, we identified a thiophosphate modified aptamer (thioaptamer, TA) against E-selectin (ESTA-1) by employing a two-step selection strategy: a recombinant protein-based TA binding selection from a combinatorial library followed by a cell-based TA binding selection using E-selectin expressing human microvascular endothelial cells. ESTA-1 selectively bound to E-selectin with nanomolar binding affinity (K(D) = 47 nM) while exhibiting minimal cross reactivity to P- and L-selectin. Furthermore, ESTA-1 binding to E-selectin on the endothelial cells markedly antagonized the adhesion (over 75% inhibition) of sLe(x) positive HL-60 cells at nanomolar concentration. ESTA-1 also bound specifically to the inflamed tumor-associated vasculature of human carcinomas derived from breast, ovarian, and skin but not to normal organs, and this binding was highly associated with the E-selectin expression level. Similarly, intravenously injected ESTA-1 demonstrated distinct binding to the tumor vasculature in a breast cancer xenograft model. Together, our data substantiates the discovery of a thioaptamer (ESTA-1) that binds to E-selectin with high affinity and specificity, thereby highlighting the potential application of ESTA-1 for E-selectin targeted delivery.
  Cyclophosphamide therapy may rarely cause pigmentation of the nails which is of different patterns. We report a patient who developed pigmentation of nails after six cycles of cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-flourouracil chemotherapy, each repeated after 28 days for breast cancer. The patient developed nail pigmentation that started proximally and spread distally and involved all the nails of both hands and feet except the second and third toenails of right foot. Using Naranjo ADR Probability Scale, the case revealed a "probable" association with cyclophosphamide.
  Accelerated partial breast irradiation (APBI) with high dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy offers an excellent compact course of radiation due to its limited number of fractions for early-stage carcinoma of breast. One of the recent devices is SAVI (strut-adjusted volume implant), which has 6, 8 or 10 peripheral source channels with one center channel. Each channel can be differentially loaded. This paper focuses on the treatment planning, dosimetry and quality assurance aspects of HDR brachytherapy implant with GammaMed Plus HDR afterloader unit. The accelerated PBI balloon devices normally inflate above 35 cc range, and hence these balloon type devices cannot be accommodated in small lumpectomy cavity sizes. CT images were obtained and 3-D dosimetric plans were done with Brachyvision planning system. The 3-D treatment planning and dosimetric data were evaluated with planning target volume (PTV)_eval V90, V95, V150, V200 skin dose and minimum distance to skin. With the use of the SAVI 6-1 mini device, we were able to accomplish an excellent coverage - V90, V95, V150 and V200 to 98%, 95%, 37 cc (<50 cc volume) and 16 cc (<20 cc volume), respectively. Maximum skin dose was between 73% and 90%, much below the prescribed dose of 34 Gy. The minimum skin distance achieved was 5 to 11 mm. The volume that received 50% of the prescribed radiation dose was found to be lower with SAVI. The multi-channel SAVI-based implants reduced the maximum skin dose to markedly lower levels as compared to other modalities, simultaneously achieving best dose coverage to target volume. Differential-source dwell-loading allows modulation of the radiation dose distribution in symmetric or asymmetric opening of the catheter shapes and is also advantageous in cavities close to chest wall.
  Vinflunine (VFL) is the first bifluorinated tubulin-targeted agent obtained through a semi synthetic process using superacidic chemistry. Pharmacologic models evidenced a high degree of activity from several cancer lines. The intravenous formulation of VFL (Javlor, Pierre Fabre Medicament, Boulogne, France) is registered for bladder cancer and is undergoing Phase III trials for nonsmall cell lung and breast cancer. To support most of the pharmacokinetic studies in humans, a sensitive high-performance liquid chromatography bioanalytical method coupled with ultraviolet detection was developed and validated for the simultaneous quantification of VFL and its active metabolite 4-O-deacetylvinflunine. The two compounds, together with 17-bromovinorelbine, used as an internal standard, were extracted from blood (1 mL) by a liquid-liquid process under basic conditions using diethyl ether. The organic phase was then back-extracted with HCl 0.1 mol/L. Analysis was performed through a cyano column and detection was set at 268 nm. Total analysis run time was less than 15 minutes. The assay was sensitive for the two compounds to at least 2 ng/mL and calibration curves were linear up to 200 ng/mL. The between-run imprecision and the mean inaccuracy were lower than 7% and 8.3%, respectively. Blood samples were stable when stored at -70°C over 24 months. The long-term reproducibility and the suitability of this analytical method were demonstrated through the analysis of about 6000 biologic samples during the clinical development of intravenous VFL. This method is adequately sensitive to monitor the blood concentrations observed at the recommended dose defined in a clinical setting.
  Mitomycin C (MMC) is an effective cytostatic agent used in the treatment of patients with gynecological malignancies and breast carcinoma. This review presents and discusses the current treatment options with MMC in patients with breast, cervical, and vulvar carcinomas, as well as rarer gynecological malignancies. New combinations and developments are also presented and their potential clinical relevance is examined. Consequently, also for the next years a MMC-containing chemotherapy continues to be a relevant part of an individualized therapy despite numerous innovative new drugs, especially for the salvage therapy of metastatic breast cancer and the simultaneous radiochemotherapy of other gynecological malignancies.
  Several human breast cancer cell lines have been shown to contain mutational activation of Ras oncogenes. The goal of this review is to clarify the physiology and biochemical pathways of Ras family oncogenes in order to understand thoroughly the mechanisms behind Ras gene mutations. Ras genes are involved in the early stages of mammary oncogenesis through augmented expression of the normal p21 protein. Recognition of the mechanisms resulting in aberrant expression of Ras, as well as unveiling the influence of the Ras family gene activation in the Ras signaling pathway, should have a major impact on clarifying the oncogenetic process, possibly offering candidate therapy and prevention strategies.
  BACKGROUND: Filgrastim was developed to treat chemotherapy-induced neutropenia. This phase III study was designed to demonstrate bioequivalence of Amgen filgrastim and a biosimilar filgrastim developed by Hospira (Study GCF071; sponsored by Hospira). PATIENTS AND METHODS: Breast cancer patients suitable for treatment with doxorubicin and docetaxel in the neoadjuvant/adjuvant or first-line metastatic setting were enrolled at 37 European centers. Patients were randomized (2:1) to receive Hospira filgrastim or Amgen filgrastim, after the end of chemotherapy. Filgrastim (5 μg/kg/day) was administered under double-blind conditions. Primary endpoint to demonstrate bioequivalence was duration of severe neutropenia (DSN) in cycle 1. RESULTS: 184 patients were randomized to Hospira filgrastim and 95 to Amgen filgrastim. Mean DSN in cycle 1 was similar with Hospira filgrastim (1.6 days; n = 165) and Amgen filgrastim (1.3 days; n = 85), meeting predefined criteria for bioequivalence. Secondary endpoints supporting bioequivalence included mean time to absolute neutrophil count recovery and incidence of febrile neutropenia. The most common treatment-related adverse event with Hospira filgrastim was grade 1-2 bone pain. CONCLUSIONS: Hospira filgrastim and Amgen filgrastim are bioequivalent in efficacy with similar safety profiles. Hospira filgrastim may be useful for the prophylaxis of complications related to neutropenia caused by chemotherapy.
  Aim. The study was to evaluate the effect of the dietary supplement BreastDefend (BD) on the proliferation and invasive behavior of highly metastatic human breast cancer cells in vitro. METHODS: Cell proliferation and cytotoxicity of BD was evaluated in MDA-MB-231 cells treated with BD (0-40 μg/mL) by MTT assay and trypan blue staining, respectively. Expression of cell cycle regulatory genes were determined by DNA-microarray analysis. Effect of BD on invasiveness was assessed by cellular adhesion, migration, and invasion assays. RESULTS: BD treatment of cells MDA-MB-231 resulted in the cytostatic inhibition of cell proliferation with IC(50) 22.2, 19.1, and 17.5 μg/mL for 24, 48, and 72 hours, respectively. The inhibition of proliferation was mediated by the upregulation expression of CCNG1, CHEK1, CDKN1C, GADD45A, and E2F2, whereas BD downregulated expression of CCNA1 and CDK6 genes. The induction of expression of GADD45A and inhibition of expression of cyclin A1 (gene CCNA1) by BD was also confirmed on the protein level. BD treatment suppressed the invasive behavior of MDA-MB-231 cells by the inhibition of cellular adhesion, migration, and invasion. This inhibition of invasiveness was mediated by the suppression of secretion of urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA), and by the downregulation of expression of CXCR4 in breast cancer cells treated with BD. CONCLUSION: BD inhibits proliferation and invasive behavior of the highly metastatic human breast cancer cells in vitro. BD may have a therapeutic potential for prevention or treatment of highly metastatic breast cancers.
  Oesophageal cancer presents as advanced disease; in the majority of patients the symptoms are present for many months prior to diagnosis. Dysphagia has been described as the key to an early diagnosis of oesophageal cancer. This study aims to assess the public perception of the importance of this symptom. Ninety-six patients completed a questionnaire. This evaluated patient understanding of symptoms of dysphagia compared to the finding of a breast lump, haemoptysis, chest pain and loss of weight concerning urgency, probable cause of symptoms and treatment required. Sixty-five patients (71%) would visit their GP within 24 h of finding a breast lump or suffering from haemoptysis (82%) or having chest pain (82%). Forty-seven patients (51%) who experienced dysphagia would seek medical advice after one week and further 18 (19%) after one month (P<0.0001). Only eight patients (10%) associated dysphagia with cancer compared to 53 patients (57%) with the finding of a breast lump (P<0.031). This study concludes that there is poor understanding of the main symptoms of oesophageal cancer. New health campaigns are needed if the cancer is to be detected at an earlier and potentially curable stage. Keywords: Oesophageal cancer; Awareness; Education.
  Sphingosine kinase 1 (SK1) is an enzyme that catalyses the phosphorylation of sphingosine to produce the bioactive lipid sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P). We demonstrate here that the SK1 inhibitor, SKi (2-(p-hydroxyanilino)-4-(p-chlorophenyl)thiazole) induces the proteasomal degradation of SK1 in human pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells, androgen-sensitive LNCaP prostate cancer cells, MCF-7 and MCF-7 HER2 breast cancer cells and that this is likely mediated by ceramide as a consequence of catalytic inhibition of SK1 by SKi. Moreover, SK1 is polyubiquitinated under basal conditions, and SKi appears to increase the degradation of SK1 by activating the proteasome. In addition, the proteasomal degradation of SK1a and SK1b in androgen-sensitive LNCaP cells is associated with the induction of apoptosis. However, SK1b in LNCaP-AI cells (androgen-independent) is less sensitive to SKi-induced proteasomal degradation and these cells are resistant to SKi-induced apoptosis, thereby highlighting the ubiquitin-proteasomal degradation of SK1 as an important mechanism controlling cell survival.
  Our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying the pharmacological actions of estrogen receptor (ER) ligands has evolved considerably in recent years. Much of this knowledge has come from a detailed dissection of the mechanism(s) of action of the Selective Estrogen Receptor Modulators (SERMs) tamoxifen and raloxifene, so called for their ability to function as ER agonists or antagonists depending on the tissue in which they operate. These mechanistic insights have had a significant impact on the discovery of second generation SERMs, some of which are in late stage clinical development for the treatment/prevention of breast cancer as well as other estrogenopathies. In addition to the SERMs, however, have emerged the Selective Estrogen Degraders (SERDs), which as their name suggests, interact with and facilitate ER turnover in cells. One drug of this class, fulvestrant, has been approved as a third line treatment for ER-positive metastatic breast cancer. Whereas the first generation SERMs/SERDs were discovered in a serendipitous manner, this review will highlight how our understanding of the molecular pharmacology of ER ligands has been utilized in the development of the next generation of SERMs/SERDs, some of which are likely to have a major impact on the pharmacotherapy of breast cancer.
  BACKGROUND: We report our experience of using a totally implantable access port (TIAP) through the external jugular vein (EJV) when the cephalic vein (CV) approach is not feasible. METHODS: We reviewed 197 cases involving TIAP implantation through the EJV in a single medical center between January 1995 and January 2009. All the ports were implanted after the CV approach was found unfeasible. Patient characteristics, operating time, and early and late complications were recorded. RESULTS: The mean patient age was 50 years (range: 33-75). The mean operating time was 54.5 ± 7.5 minutes. Early complications within the first 30 postoperative days included port hematoma (2%) and catheter migration (2%). The late postoperative complications included catheter occlusion (2.5%), venous thrombosis (2%), and port infection (1.5%). There were no complications associated with TIAP disconnection. CONCLUSIONS: The EJV approach is an easy and safe alternative method for TIAP implantation when the CV approach is not feasible. This method can avoid conversion to percutaneous puncture of the subclavian vein, which could result in life-threatening complications such as pneumothorax and hemothorax. In patients with breast cancer or those who are contraindicated for TIAP implantation on the opposite side, the EJV cutdown approach provides an alternative route with comfortable and satisfactory results as complications with this approach are rare.
  A rapid and sensitive ultra performance liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS) method has been developed and validated for the simultaneous quantitative determination of dextromethorphan (DM) and its metabolites dextrorphan (DX), 3-methoxymorphinan (3MM) and 3-hydroxymorphinan (3HM), in human lithium heparinized plasma. The extraction involved a simple liquid-liquid extraction with 1ml n-butylchloride from 200μl aliquots of plasma, after the addition of 20μl 4% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide and 100μl stable labeled isotopic internal standards in acetonitrile. Chromatographic separations were achieved on an Aquity UPLC(®) BEH C(18) 1.7μm 2.1mm×100mm column eluted at a flow-rate of 0.250ml/min on a gradient of acetonitrile. The overall cycle time of the method was 7min, with elution times of 1.3min for DX and 3HM, 2.8min for 3MM and 2.9min for DM. The multiple reaction monitoring transitions were set at 272>215 (m/z), at 258>133 (m/z), at 258>213 (m/z) and at 244>157 (m/z) for DM, DX, 3MM and 3HM, respectively. The calibration curves were linear (r(2)≥0.995) over the range of 0.500-100nM with the lower limit of quantitation validated at 0.500nM for all compounds, which is equivalent to 136, 129, 129 and 122pg/ml for DM, DX, 3MM and 3HM, respectively. Extraction recoveries were constant, but ranged from 39% for DM to 83% for DX. The within-run and between-run precisions were within 11.6%, while the accuracy ranged from 92.7 to 110.6%. The applicability of the bioanalytical method was demonstrated and is currently implemented in a clinical trial to study DM as probe-drug for individualized tamoxifen treatment in breast cancer patients.
  The steroid hormone receptors (SHRs) are ligand-dependent intracellular transcription factors that are known to influence the development and growth of many human cancers. SHRs pass signals from a steroid/hormone to the target genes by interacting with specific response element DNA sequences and various coregulatory proteins that consists of activators and/or corepressors. Disruptions in physiological functions of SHRs leads to several types of malignancies such as breast cancer, leukemia and lymphoma, prostate cancer, ovarian cancer, and lung cancer among others. Steroids/hormones/SHRs and their coregulators have opened up a unique window for novel steroid-based targeted therapies for cancer. Thus, dysregulation of SHR signaling in cancers compared with normal tissues can be exploited to target drugs that prevent and treat human cancers. In recent years, hormonal therapy has made a major contribution to the treatment of several cancers including reduced recurrence rates and longer survival rates. Development of various steroid receptor modulators and their potential therapeutic efficacies has provided us a great opportunity to effectively manage diseases like cancer in future. In this review article, we have summarized up-to-date knowledge of the role of SHRs in the development and progression of cancers, and potential endocrine-based therapeutic approaches to tackle these diseases.
  A wide variety of new bi(hetero)aryl derivatives of the thieno[3,2-b]pyridine skeleton was obtained in high to excellent yields (65-91%) by Suzuki-Miyaura cross-coupling of the methyl 3-amino-6-bromothieno[3,2-b]pyridine-2-carboxylate, recently reported by us, with aryl or heteroaryl pinacolboranes or potassium trifluoroborates. The coupling products obtained were evaluated for their growth inhibitory effect on three human tumor cell lines, representing different tumor models, MCF-7 (breast adenocarcinoma), A375-C5 (melanoma) and NCI-H460 (non-small cell lung cancer). Some of the compounds showed an interesting activity against the tested cell lines, with GI(50) values in the μM range, and it was possible to establish some structure-activity relationships (SARs). Several compounds presented GI(50) values below 15 μM, particularly a bithiophene and an o-aniline thienopyridine derivative. The first presented selectivity for MCF-7 and NCI-H460 cell lines, with very low GI(50) values (0.7-1.0 μM), while the latter was active against the three cell lines tested in this study, also presenting very low GI(50) values (2.5-4.2 μM). The effect of these two compounds on cell cycle progression was analyzed in the NCI-H460 cell line. Results showed that both compounds interfered with the normal cell cycle distribution.
  Multidrug resistance of tumours is one of the most important factors that leads to chemotherapy failure. A multidrug-resistant breast cancer cell line, MCF-7/Taxol, was established from the drug-sensitive parent cell line MCF-7. The biological properties of MCF-7/Taxol, including its drug resistance profile and profile of paclitaxel binding proteins, were analysed and compared with the parent cell line. A number of paclitaxel binding proteins were present in MCF-7 cells but absent from MCF-7/Taxol cells, namely heat shock protein 90, actinin and dermcidin precursor. The identification of differential paclitaxel binding proteins between the multidrug-resistant MCF-7/Taxol cell line and the parent drug-sensitive cell line MCF-7 provides insight into possible mechanisms involved in resistance to these chemotherapy drugs.
  Background Accurate evaluation of human epidermal growth factor receptor type-2 (HER2) status based on core needle biopsy (CNB) specimens is mandatory for identification of patients with primary breast cancer who will benefit from primary systemic therapy with trastuzumab. The aim of the present study was to validate the application of HER2 testing with CNB specimens from primary breast cancers in terms of interobserver reproducibility and comparison with surgically resected specimens. Methods A total of 100 pairs of archival formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded CNB and surgically resected specimens of invasive breast carcinomas were cut into sections. All 100 paired sections were subjected to HER2 testing by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and 27 paired sections were subjected to that by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), the results being evaluated by three and two observers, respectively. Interobserver agreement levels in terms of judgment and the concordance of consensus scores between CNB samples and the corresponding surgically resected specimens were estimated as the percentage agreement and statistic. Results In CNB specimens, the percentage interobserver agreement of HER2 scoring by IHC was 76% (k=0.71) for 3 x 3 categories (0-1+ versus 2+ versus 3+) and 90% (k=0.80) for 2 x 2 categories (0-2+ versus 3+). These levels were close to the corresponding ones for the surgically resected specimens: 80% (k=0.77) for 3 x 3 categories and 92% (k=0.88) for 2 x 2 categories. Concordance of consensus for HER2 scores determined by IHC between CNB and the corresponding surgical specimens was 87% (k=0.77) for 3 x 3 categories, and 94% (k=0.83) for 2 x 2 categories. Among the 13 tumors showing discordance in the mean IHC scores between the CNB and surgical specimens, the results of consensus for FISH results were concordant in 11. The rate of successful FISH analysis and the FISH positivity rate in cases with a HER2 IHC score of 2+ differed among specimens processed at different institutions. Conclusion It is mandatory to study HER2 on breast cancers, and either CNB or surgical specimen can be used.
  BACKGROUND: EGF receptor variant III (EGFRvIII) is the most common variant of the EGF receptor observed in human tumors.It results from the in frame deletion of exons 2-7 and the generation of a novel glycine residue at the junction of exons 1 and 8. This novel juxtaposition of amino acids within the extra-cellular domain of the EGF receptor creates a tumor specific and immunogenic epitope. EGFRvIII expression has been seen in many tumor types including glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), breast adenocarcinoma, non-small cell lung carcinoma, ovarian adenocarcinoma and prostate cancer, but has been rarely observed in normal tissue. Because this variant is tumor specific and highly immunogenic, it can be used for both a diagnostic marker as well as a target for immunotherapy. Unfortunately many of the monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies directed against EGFRvIII have cross reactivity to wild type EGFR or other non-specific proteins. Furthermore, a monoclonal antibody to EGFRvIII is not readily available to the scientific community. RESULTS: In this study, we have developed a recombinant antibody that is specific for EGFRvIII, has little cross reactivity for the wild type receptor, and which can be easily produced.We initially designed a recombinant antibody with two anti-EGFRvIII single chain Fv's linked together and a human IgG1 Fc component.To enhance the specificity of this antibody for EGFRvIII,we mutated tyrosine H59 of the CDRH2 domain and tyrosine H105 of the CDRH3 domain to phenylalanine for both the anti-EGFRvIII sequence inserts.This mutated recombinant antibody, called RAbDMvIII, specifically detects EGFRvIII expression in EGFRvIII expressing cell lines as well as in EGFRvIII expressing GBM primary tissue by western blot, immunohistochemistry (IHC)and immunofluorescence (IF) and FACS analysis. It does not recognize wild type EGFR in any of these assays.The affinity of this antibody for EGFRvIII peptide is 1.7 x 107 M-1 as determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). CONCLUSION: This recombinant antibody thus holds great potential to be used as a research reagent and diagnostic tool in research laboratories and clinics because of its high quality, easy viability and unique versatility. This antibody is also a strong candidate to be investigated for further in vivo therapeutic studies.
  BACKGROUND: The Exercise Intensity Trial (EXcITe) is a randomized trial to compare the efficacy of supervised moderate-intensity aerobic training to moderate to high-intensity aerobic training, relative to attention control, on aerobic capacity, physiologic mechanisms, patient-reported outcomes, and biomarkers in women with operable breast cancer following the completion of definitive adjuvant therapy. METHODS: Using a single-center, randomized design, 174 postmenopausal women (58 patients / study arm) with histologically confirmed, operable breast cancer presenting to Duke University Medical Center (DUMC) will be enrolled in this trial following completion of primary therapy (including surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy). After baseline assessments, eligible participants will be randomized to one of two supervised aerobic training interventions (moderate-intensity or moderate/high-intensity aerobic training) or an attention-control group (progressive stretching). The aerobic training interventions will include 150 mins.wk-1 of supervised treadmill walking per week at an intensity of 60%-70% (moderate-intensity) or 60% to 100% (moderate to high-intensity) of the individually determined peak oxygen consumption (VO2peak) between 20-45 minutes/session for 16 weeks. The progressive stretching program will be consistent with the exercise interventions in terms of program length (16 weeks), social interaction (participants will receive one-on-one instruction), and duration (20-45 mins/session). The primary study endpoint is VO2peak, as measured by an incremental cardiopulmonary exercise test. Secondary endpoints include physiologic determinants that govern VO2peak, patient-reported outcomes, and biomarkers associated with breast cancer recurrence / mortality. All endpoints will be assessed at baseline and after the intervention (16 weeks). CONCLUSIONS: EXCITE is designed to investigate the intensity of aerobic training required to induce optimal improvements in VO2peak and other pertinent outcomes in women who have completed definitive adjuvant therapy for operable breast cancer. Overall, this trial will inform and refine exercise guidelines to optimize recovery in breast and other cancer survivors following the completion of primary cytotoxic therapy. TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT01186367.
  Introduction: Breast-conserving therapy is currently the standard of management of breast cancer cases. Radiotherapy is an integral part of it; however, it has several complications. Radiation induced burn is a common complication of radiotherapy that requires more effective lines of management rather than the classically used ones. We investigated whether the addition of pentoxifylline (PTX) alone or in combination with topical honey is effective in its management compared to the standard measures. Methods and Materials: In this prospective study, patients were randomly allocated into three groups each of 50 cases. Group A received standard burn treatment (control group). Group B received additionally 400 mg PTX twice daily. Group C received the same treatment as Group B with adding topical purified honey ointment. Patients were assessed initially and subsequently after 4 and 12 weeks, for projected coetaneous surface area (PCSA) of burn, Pain severity, limitation of movement and exudation. Results: There was a striking regression of the mean PCSAs of lesions among groups B and C at 12 weeks, with reduction rates (86±61%) and (76±58%) respectively (p<0.0001***). The addition of honey was associated with marked pain reliving effect and rescue of proper motion. Finally, honey was associated with shorter duration of treatment as 74% of group C patients completely recovered after 12 weeks, compared to only 54% and 36% of groups B and A in order. Conclusion: Combination of PTX and honey is an ideal measure for treatment of radiation-induced burn following breast conservative surgery.
  CXCL-12 and its receptor CXCR4 participate in breast cancer and melanoma cell metastasis to bone and lymphoid nodes. CD44, as a receptor for hyaluronic acid, is involved in lymphocyte recirculation, homing, adhesion and migration. But the role of CD44 in CXCL-12 induced leukemia cell migration still remains unclear. The present study showed that CXCL-12 stimulation induced the rapid internalization of CXCR4 and facilitated the formation of lamellipodia and uropod in acute leukemia cell line HL-60. CXCL-12 also induced CD44 translocation into the uropod, while CD44 remained evenly distributed on the untreated cell membranes. Results suggest that CD44 participates in CXCL-12 induced cell polarization and subsequent cell migration.
  Background: Hereditary breast cancer has a profound impact on individual family members and on their mutual communication and interactions. The way at-risk women cope with the threat of hereditary breast cancer may depend on the quality of family communication about hereditary breast cancer and on the perceived social support from family and friends.Objective: To examine the associations of family communication and social support with long-term psychological distress in a group of women at risk for hereditary breast cancer, who opted either for regular breast surveillance or prophylactic surgery.Methods: The study cohort consisted of 222 women at risk for hereditary breast cancer, who previously participated in a study on the psychological consequences of either regular breast cancer surveillance or prophylactic surgery. General and breast cancer specific distress, hereditary cancer-related family communication, perceived social support, and demographics were assessed.Results: Using structural equation modelling, we found that open communication about hereditary cancer within the family was associated with less general and breast cancer specific distress. In addition, perceived support from family and friends was indirectly associated with less general and breast cancer-specific distress through open communication within the family.Discussion: These findings indicate that family communication and perceived social support from friends and family are of paramount importance in the long-term adaptation to being at risk for hereditary breast cancer. Attention for these issues needs to be incorporated in the care of women at risk for hereditary breast cancer. Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
  Curcumin (diferuloylmethane), the yellow pigment in Indian saffron (Curcuma longa; also called turmeric, haldi, or haridara in the East and curry powder in the West), has been consumed by people for centuries as a dietary component and for a variety of proinflammatory ailments. Extensive research within the last decade in cell culture and in rodents has revealed that curcumin can sensitize tumors to different chemotherapeutic agents including doxorubicin, 5-FU, paclitaxel, vincristine, melphalan, butyrate, cisplatin, celecoxib, vinorelbine, gemcitabine, oxaliplatin, etoposide, sulfinosine, thalidomide, and bortezomib. Chemosensitization has been observed in cancers of the breast, colon, pancreas, gastric, liver, blood, lung, prostate, bladder, cervix, ovary, head and neck, and brain and in multiple myeloma, leukemia, and lymphoma. Similar studies have also revealed that this agent can sensitize a variety of tumors to gamma radiation including glioma, neuroblastoma, cervical carcinoma, epidermal carcinoma, prostate cancer, and colon cancer. How curcumin acts as a chemosensitizer and radiosensitizer has also been studied extensively. For example, it downregulates various growth regulatory pathways and specific genetic targets including genes for NF-κB, STAT3, COX2, Akt, antiapoptotic proteins, growth factor receptors, and multidrug-resistance proteins. Although it acts as a chemosensitizer and radiosensitizer for tumors in some cases, curcumin has also been shown to protect normal organs such as liver, kidney, oral mucosa, and heart from chemotherapy and radiotherapy-induced toxicity. The protective effects of curcumin appear to be mediated through its ability to induce the activation of NRF2 and induce the expression of antioxidant enzymes (e.g., hemeoxygenase-1, glutathione peroxidase, modulatory subunit of gamma-glutamyl-cysteine ligase, and NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1, increase glutathione (a product of the modulatory subunit of gamma-glutamyl-cysteine ligase), directly quench free radicals, and inhibit p300 HAT activity. These preclinical studies are expected to lead to clinical trials to prove the potential of this age-old golden spice for treating cancer patients.
  We considered flavonoids and proanthocyanidins in a network of multicentric Italian case-control studies including about 10,000 incident, histologically confirmed cases of selected cancers and over 16,000 controls. Odds ratios (ORs) for the highest vs. the lowest quintile of 6 classes of flavonoids and proanthocyanidins were estimated by multiple logistic regression models. Total flavonoids, flavanones, and flavonols were inversely related to oral and laryngeal cancers (ORs, respectively 0.56 and 0.60 for total flavonoids; 0.51 and 0.60 for flavanones; and 0.62 and 0.32 for flavonols). Flavanols were also inversely related to laryngeal cancer (OR = 0.64), whereas flavanones were inversely related to esophageal cancer (OR = 0.38). A reduced risk of colorectal cancer was found for high intake of anthocyanidins (OR = 0.67), flavonols (OR = 0.64), flavones (OR = 0.78), and isoflavones (OR = 0.76). Inverse relations with breast cancer were found for flavones (OR = 0.81) and flavonols (OR = 0.80). Flavonols (OR = 0.63) and isoflavones (OR = 0.51) were inversely associated to ovarian cancer, whereas flavonols (OR = 0.69) and flavones (OR = 0.68) were inversely associated to renal cancer. No association between flavonoids and prostate cancer emerged. We found inverse associations between proanthocyanidins and colorectal cancer. These associations appeared stronger for proanthocyanidins with a higher degree of polymerization (OR = 0.69 for ≥ 10 mers).
  BACKGROUND: The hook-wire technique is used to guide surgical excision of nonpalpable breast lesions. Recently, isotope has been used to guide the excision, and when sentinel node biopsy is performed during the same operation, the procedure is termed Sentinel Node and Occult Lesion Localization (SNOLL). We evaluated the use of this procedure for nonpalpable cancers in Chinese women. METHODS: Seventy-four patients underwent SNOLL before breast-conserving surgery. Intratumoral injection of sulfur colloid and lymphoscintigraphy (LSG) were performed. A gamma probe was used for resection planning and localization of the sentinel node (SN). Blue dye mapping was used in patients with negative LSG. Complete excision was defined as a tumor-free margin greater than 1 mm. RESULTS: The primary breast lesion was successfully removed in 73 patients (99%). Complete excision was achieved in 61 patients (82%). Drainage to axilla was detected by LSG in 53 patients (72%). The gamma probe was more sensitive than LSG and had an 82% SN identification rate. Patients with a positive LSG had a higher chance of SN localization by gamma probe than patients with a negative LSG (100% vs. 38%, p < 0.001). In patients with a negative LSG, supplementary blue dye mapping increased the SN localization rate from 38 to 90%. The SN identification rate was 97% in the whole series. CONCLUSION: Isotope-guided surgery was reliable, with a 99% localization rate for nonpalpable breast lesions and an 82% SN localization rate. The success rate of SN identification could be improved to 97% with the addition of blue dye mapping for patients with negative drainage on lymphoscintigraphy.
  BACKGROUND: To improve the quality of breast cancer screening by ultrasonography, both effective training and evaluation of the performance of the examiners of breast ultrasound are essential. METHODS: The Educational Committee of the Japan Association of Breast and Thyroid Sonology, an NPO, has established 2-day training programs on breast ultrasonography with tests at the end of the programs. The tests are performed using images to evaluate the ability of observers to detect and evaluate lesions on ultrasound. Ability to detect lesions was examined by using videos, and ability to evaluate lesions was examined by using still images. The results of tests taken by 422 physicians and 415 technologists were analyzed. RESULTS: In a comparison between physicians and technologists, the video specificity, the still image sensitivity, and the percentage of category agreement did not show any significant differences. The video sensitivity, the still image specificity, and the percentage of disease name agreement were significantly higher in technologists. Observers who had experienced <100 cases showed significantly poorer results in all subjects except for the video specificity in physicians and the still image specificity in technologists. CONCLUSIONS: Ultrasound technologists perform as well as physicians in recognizing and interpreting cancers on breast ultrasound, which supports their role in performing the initial screening examination.
  This article is part of a larger study on the role of spirituality in coping with breast cancer among Malaysian Muslim women. The study seeks to reveal the meaning of the experience through the stories of three Muslim women surviving advanced breast cancer, to better understand the deep meanings that inform their experiences with spirituality and transformation as they cope with the challenges of breast cancer. Data were gathered using in-depth interview. Qualitative methods were used in identifying two themes-illness as an awakening and hope and freedom comes from surrendering to God. The themes were discussed in the context of two broad areas: (1) what are the new meanings these women discovered in their experiences with cancer; and (2) how did the new meanings change their lives? The study suggests that cancer survivors' experiences with cancer and their learning processes must be understood within the appropriate cultural context. This is especially so for spirituality. The common emphasis of spirituality on relationship with God, self and others, may significantly influence how people learn to live with cancer.
  Background:The recent introduction of a dynamic nuclear polarisation technique has permitted noninvasive imaging of tumour cell metabolism in vivo following intravenous administration of (13)C-labelled cell substrates.Methods:Changes in hyperpolarised [1-(13)C]pyruvate and [1,4-(13)C(2)]fumarate metabolism were evaluated in both MDA-MB-231 cells and in implanted MDA-MB-231 tumours following doxorubicin treatment.Results:Treatment of MDA-MB-231 cells resulted in the induction of apoptosis, which was accompanied by a decrease in hyperpolarised (13)C label flux between [1-(13)C]pyruvate and lactate, which was correlated with a decrease in the cellular NAD(H) coenzyme pool. There was also an increase in the rate of fumarate conversion to malate, which accompanied the onset of cellular necrosis. In vivo, the decrease in (13)C label exchange between pyruvate and lactate and the increased flux between fumarate and malate, following drug treatment, were shown to occur in the absence of any detectable change in tumour size.Conclusion:We show here that the early responses of a human breast adenocarcinoma tumour model to drug treatment can be followed by administration of both hyperpolarised [1-(13)C]pyruvate and [1,4-(13)C(2)]fumarate. These techniques could be used, therefore, in the clinic to detect the early responses of breast tumours to treatment.British Journal of Cancer advance online publication, 5 October 2010; doi:10.1038/sj.bjc.6605945 www.bjcancer.com.
  AIM: A mainstay of lymphedema management involves the use of compression therapy. Compression therapy application is variable at different levels of disease severity. Evidence is scant to direct clinicians in best practice regarding compression therapy use. Further, compression clinical trials are fragmented and poorly extrapolable to the greater population. An ideal construct for conducting clinical trials in regards to compression therapy will promote parallel global initiatives based on a standard research agenda. The purpose of this article is to review current evidence in practice regarding compression therapy for BCRL management and based on this evidence, offer an expert consensus recommendation for a research agenda and prescriptive trials. Recommendations herein focus solely on compression interventions. METHODS: This document represents the proceedings of a session organized by the International Compression Club (ICC) in June 2009 in Ponzano (Veneto, Italy). The purpose of the meeting was to enable a group of experts to discuss the existing evidence for compression treatment in breast cancer related lymphedema (BCRL) concentrating on areas where randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are lacking. RESULTS: The current body of research suggests efficacy of compression interventions in the treatment and management of lymphedema. However, studies to date have failed to adequately address various forms of compression therapy and their optimal application in BCRL. We offer recommendations for standardized compression research trials for prophylaxis of arm lymphedema and for the management of chronic BCRL. Suggestions are also made regarding; inclusion and exclusion criteria, measurement methodology and additional variables of interest for researchers to capture. CONCLUSION: This document should inform future research trials in compression therapy and serve as a guide to clinical researchers, industry researchers and lymphologists regarding the strengths, weaknesses and shortcomings of the current literature. By providing this construct for research trials, the authors aim to support evidence-based therapy interventions, promote a cohesive, standardized and informative body of literature to enhance clinical outcomes, improve the quality of future research trials, inform industry innovation and guide policy related to BCRL.
  AIM: The aim of this paper was to examine the reliability and validity of a new measurement device that counters the disadvantages of the traditional method of arm circumference measurements. METHODS: We measured the arm on the non-operated side of breast cancer patients. Sixty-four patients were measured twice by the same assessor and 48 patients were measured twice by two different assessors. The arm circumferences were measured at the olecranon and each 4 cm proximal and distal of the olecranon. The measurements were performed with a self-developed device consisting of a stainless steel bar on which a tapeline was fixed at every 4 cm distance. The arm volume was calculated from the circumference measurements with the frustrum formula and was also measured directly with the water displacement method. RESULTS: For the circumference measurements, intrarater and interrater ICCs ranged between 0.942 and 0.998. ICCs for the calculated arm volume were also very high. No systematic changes between the first to the second assessment could be found. The standard error of measurement for the circumference measurements as well as for the calculated arm volume was low (between 0.8% and 2.0%). An increase of 1.0 cm or more of the arm circumference at any measurement side and of 55 ml or more of the calculated arm volume was clinically significant. CONCLUSION: Arm circumferences and also the calculated arm volume can be measured quickly and accurately with a simple and inexpensive device.
  OBJECTIVE:: The aim of this study was to elucidate the clinicopathological features and prognosis of mucinous cystic neoplasms (MCNs). MATERIALS AND METHODS:: We performed a multi-institutional, retrospective study on a collected series of patients with MCN pathologically defined by ovarian-type stroma. Clinicopathological features and prognosis were investigated. RESULT:: Mucinous cystic neoplasm was confirmed in 156 cases, including 129 adenomas (82.7%) and 21 noninvasive (13.4%) and 6 invasive carcinomas (3.9%). Patients with MCN were exclusively women (98.1%) with the mean age of 48.1 years. All but 1 MCN were in the pancreatic body/tail region with a mean size of 65.3 mm. Communication between the cyst and the pancreatic duct was found in 18.1%. The 3-, 5-, and 10-year survival rates were 97.6%, 96.6%, and 96.6%, respectively. A significant difference in the survival rates was observed between adenomas and carcinomas and between minimally invasive carcinomas and invasive carcinomas. Cyst diameter and presence of mural nodule were predictive of malignant MCN. CONCLUSIONS:: Mucinous cystic neoplasm is a rare but distinctive pancreatic cystic neoplasm with a favorable overall prognosis. All MCNs should be resected to prevent malignant changes but can be observed for an appropriate time when the lesion is small without the presence of mural nodules.
  A 74-year-old woman with impaired glucose tolerance exhibited virilization. An examination of various hormone levels showed normal pituitary hormone and adrenal hormone levels. However, the patient's blood testosterone level was remarkably high and was suspected of having caused the virilization. An abdominal computed tomography revealed a multilocular cystoma in the left ovary with the features of a mature cystic teratoma. In addition, a chest computed tomography revealed the presence of a mass in the left breast that was subsequently diagnosed as breast cancer based on the results of a biopsy. After the simultaneous surgical resection of the ovarian and breast tumors, her blood testosterone level decreased. The mature cystic teratoma containing a Brenner tumor was considered to be responsible for the high testosterone level because of the presence of androgenic enzymes. This case is extremely rare, but the case was accurately diagnosed through a comprehensive analysis.
  OBJECTIVES: Despite the fact that breast conservation therapy has been established as an effective treatment, a number of issues and controversies currently surround the application of this treatment for patients with stage T1 and T2 breast cancer. METHODS: Records of patients with histologically confirmed stage T1 (n = 1172) and stage T2 (n = 349) breast cancer, treated with wide local tumor excision and whole breast irradiation between January 1970 and December 2000, were prospectively registered on our database. Median follow-up was 6.6 years. Numerous publications addressing issues to be reviewed were collected, and data and prevailing controversies are discussed. RESULTS: The 10-year actuarial incidence of ipsilateral breast relapse was 7% for T1 and 11% for T2 tumors. Results with breast conservation therapy were equivalent in white or black women with T1 or T2 tumors. In patients younger than 40 years, incidence of failures was 10% for T1 (in contrast to 4% for other age groups) and 15% for T2 lesions (in contrast to 6% in other groups). The incidence of ipsilateral recurrences in women younger than 40 years was, for T1 tumors, 9% with negative surgical margins and 12% with close or positive margins and for T2 tumors 12% and 22%, respectively (difference not statistically significant). CONCLUSIONS: Use of breast-conserving surgical therapy should be optimized to enhance therapeutic outcome. Many developments in the oncological field and refinements in treatment planning and delivery of radiation therapy provide unique opportunities for the radiation oncologist to continue to play an integral role in the management of patients with breast cancer.
  Oncogene activation promotes an intrinsic inflammatory pathway that is crucial for cancer development. Here, we have investigated the actual effect of the inflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor (TNF) on the natural history of spontaneous mammary cancer in the HER2/neuT (NeuT) transgenic mouse model. Bone marrow transplantation from TNF knockout mice into NeuT recipients significantly impaired tumor growth, indicating that the source of TNF fostering tumor development was of bone marrow origin. We show that the absence of leukocyte-derived TNF disarranged the tumor vasculature, which lacked pericyte coverage and structural integrity, leading to diffuse vascular hemorrhage and stromal necrosis. In addition, tumor-associated Tie2-expressing monocytes were reduced and cytokine expression skewed from Th2 to Th1 type. Treatment of NeuT mice with anti-TNF antibody partially phenocopied the antitumor effect of TNF-deficient bone marrow cell transplantation, providing a strong preclinical background and rationale for the introduction of TNF antagonists in the treatment of human breast cancer, including basal-like samples for which consolidated targeted therapies do not exist. Cancer Res; 70(20); 7764-75. ©2010 AACR.
  Detection of circulating tumor cells (CTC) is advancing as an effective predictor of patient outcome and therapeutic response. Unfortunately, our knowledge of CTC biology remains limited, and the impact of drug treatments on CTC metastatic potential is currently unclear. Improved CTC imaging in vivo and analysis of free-floating tumor cells now show that cytoskeletal regulation in CTCs contrasts starkly with tumor cells attached to extracellular matrix. In this review, we examine how persistent microtubule stabilization promotes the formation of microtentacles on the surface of detached breast tumor cells and enhances metastatic potential. Cancer Res; 70(20); 7737-41. ©2010 AACR.

