Modelling population dynamics of banana plant-parasitic nematodes: A contribution to the design of sustainable cropping systems. This article describes the biological background, the model-building methodology and some applications of SIMBA-NEM, a new model to simulate the population dynamics of two major plant-parasitic nematode species of banana, Radopholus similis and Pratylenchus coffeae. For each species, each generation is represented by one cohort. Cohorts of the same species form a chain representing the developmental stages of nematodes. A logistic function describes population growth in relation with: (i) an environmental carrying capacity (K) that depends on available banana root biomass, (ii) an intrinsic growth rate (c) and (iii) competition between nematode species. Soil water content and the quantity of nematicides used are considered to be the main variables influencing the intrinsic population growth rate of each species. SIMBA-NEM was calibrated and validated using datasets from banana cropping systems in Guadeloupe (French West Indies). By analysing the sensitivity of the model to the main parameters and performing simulations of validation for various cropping systems (banana monoculture with or without nematicide applications use and a banana/sugarcane rotation) we were able to test the ability of the model to predict nematode population dynamics under a range of conditions. SIMBA-NEM is able to predict long-term nematode population size, while taking interspecific competition into account. It also helped to define knowledge gaps in nematology and modelling. SIMBA-NEM was used to optimise the effect of nematicide applications. SIMBA-NEM can already be a very helpful tool for designing sustainable and more environment-friendly banana cropping systems. In the SIMBA global crop-modelling environment, SIMBA-NEM is a key sub-model which provides essential information concerning the sustainability of the simulated system and thus permits planning environmentally friendly cropping systems.
Modelling the spatial population dynamics of the green oak leaf roller (Tortrix viridana) using density dependent competitive interactions: Effects of herbivore mortality and varying host-plant quality. Cyclic population dynamics of forest insects with periods of more than two generations have been discussed in relation to a variety of extrinsic and intrinsic forces. In the present study, we employed the selection pressure of density dependent competitive interactions according to Witting's equations (Witting, 2000) as driver for a discrete spatiotemporal model of the green oak leaf roller (Tortrix viridana). The model was successfully parameterised to rebuild the cyclic population dynamics of an empirical data set of a 30-year leaf roller monitoring in Russia. Our analysis focussed on the role of herbivore mortality and host plant food quality, which have a significant effect on T. viridana population dynamics. An additional egg or larvae mortality lowers population density and can lead to selection pressures that favour individuals with higher growth rate. This increased population growth rate can not only compensate the additional mortality, but also can lead to higher average moth abundances in subsequent generations. Furthermore, we analysed the effect of inter- and intraspecific variation in host plant quality on herbivore population dynamics and the spatial distribution of abundance and defoliation patterns. We found significant effects of the qualitative composition of a trees neighbourhood on the herbivore population of the respective tree. Also, the patchy damage patterns observable in reality have been reproduced by the present model. The applicability of the model approach and the putative genetic processes underlying Witting's model are discussed.
Local population dynamics of an invasive tree species with a complex life-history cycle: A stochastic matrix model. Biological invasions are widely accepted as having a major impact on ecosystem functioning worldwide, giving urgency to a better understanding of the factors that control their spread. Modelling tools have been developed for this purpose but are often discrete-space, discrete-time spatial-mechanistic models that adopt a computer simulation approach and resist mathematical analysis. We constructed a simple demographic matrix model to explore the local population dynamics of an invasive species with a complex life history and whose invasive success depends on resource availability, which occurs stochastically. As a case study we focused on the American black cherry (Prunus serotina Ehrh.), a gap-dependent tree able both to constitute a long-living seedling bank under unfavourable light conditions and to resprout vigorously once cut-down, which is invading European temperate forests. The model used was a stage-classified matrix population model (i.e., Lefkovitch matrix), integrating environmental stochasticity. Stochastic matrix projection analysis was combined with elasticity analysis and stochastic simulations to search for the species’ ‘Achille heel’. As expected, the population growth rate (i.e., Lyapunov exponent), which measures the risk of P. serotina invasion at the stand scale, increased with light frequency. There was a critical value above which the population of P. serotina explodes and below which it locally goes extinct. The resprouting capacity usually speed up the invasion but appeared to play a minor role. The mean duration of stand invasion was measured and important life stage transitions that mostly contribute to the local stochastic growth rate were identified. Some relevant management implications are discussed and the interest of such models for the understanding of demographic characteristics of invasive species is stressed.
Barley yellow dwarf disease risk assessment based on Bayesian modelling of aphid population dynamics. A stochastic population dynamics model is proposed to improve integrated pest management strategies against the aphid Rhopalosiphum padi, the main Barley yellow dwarf virus (BYDV) vector in winter cereals during autumn in Europe. The model is based on a temperature-dependent simulation of R. padi population dynamics. The model requires a single early assessment of the proportion of plants infested by aphids. To account for sampling errors and for uncertainty caused by the numerous factors acting on aphid population dynamics under field conditions, Bayesian statistical inference was used. The model allows assessment of the probability distribution of the area under the curve of the percentage of plants infested by R. padi during autumn, a predictor of the need for insecticide sprays against BYDV vectors. The accuracy of model predictions was tested on an independent data set collected from 1995 to 1998 in the main French small grain production areas. The use of this model as a basis for a user-friendly decision support system improving BYDV management is discussed.
A mechanistic model of a mutualism and its ecological and evolutionary dynamics. This paper develops a mechanistic model of the population dynamics and coevolution of mutualisms such as plants and mycorrhizae where one resource is traded for another resource. The mechanism is based on limiting resources and is derived from von Liebig's law of the minimum [von Liebig, 1862, Die Chemie in irher Anwendung auf Agricultur und Physiologie. 7e ed. F. Vieweg und Sohn, Braunschwieg] and Tilman's R* [Tilman, D., 1980, Resources: a graphical-mechanistic approach to competition and predation, Am. Nat. 116, 362–393]. The model makes several predictions: (1) resource limitations cause mutualisms to have stable population dynamics, despite previous predictions to the contrary, (2) game-theory based models of evolution show that potential coevolving mutualists face a Prisoner's-dilemma-like paradox, rigorously confirming the intuition of many people and (3) a mechanism which enforces fair-trade will eliminate the dilemma and a mutualism will evolve, despite having no gene flow between the species.
Modelling crayfish population dynamics using catch data: A size-structured model. In this study we explore a rather unique time series (1979–2002) of catch data of the crayfish Astacus astacus in Lake Steinsfjorden (SE Norway) in combination with temperature data and data on Canadian pondweed Elodea canadensis coverage. In 1977, E. canadensis was for the first time observed in the lake. Over the following years, the plant established dense covers over large parts of the shallow areas, excluding the crayfish from these areas and causing a sudden drop in population size. A size-structured model with bi-stability including a range of observed stage-specific life-cycle attributes (e.g. growth, fecundity, fertility, sex-ratio), population specific parameters and density-dependant (shelters, cannibalism, unspecified predators, competition between individuals, catch, number of traps) as well as density independent factors (temperature and Elodea coverage) were constructed to evaluate the various drivers for the population dynamics, and as a predictive tool for assessing the effects of future changes. Our model revealed that the decline primarily was due to density-dependant effect of the Elodea expansion with reduced number of hides and thus increased risk for predation and cannibalism, but also that temperature played an important role related to recruitment. The model should be relevant for crayfish stock management in general, and by demonstrating the major role of temperature, it is also relevant for predicting population responses under a changing climate. The model should also be applicable to other crustaceans and species with discrete growth and late maturation.
Modelling coupled peach tree–aphid population dynamics and their control by winter pruning and nitrogen fertilization. Nitrogen fertilization and winter pruning are commonly used to control crop production in peach [Prunus persica (L.) Batsch] orchards. They are also known to affect the dynamics of Myzus persicae (Sulzer) (Homoptera: Aphididae) aphid populations via bottom-up regulation processes. Interactions between crops and pests can cause complex system behaviour in response to management practices. An integrated approach will therefore improve the understanding of the effects of these two cultural practices on aphid and peach performances. We developed a simulation model that describes the cultural control of interacting peach tree and aphid population dynamics. It uses the principles of common trophic models while gathering available knowledge and explicit assumptions on peach and aphid functioning and the effects of cultural practices. The model was able to qualitatively reproduce the system behaviour observed in the field. It accounted for actions and feedback such as stimulation of foliar growth by winter pruning, consecutive aphid population increase, subsequent damage to foliage, and partial compensatory growth of foliage. The model also reproduced low losses in fruit production due to aphid infestations. However, it called for further integration of ‘long-term’ effects. Analysis of the model showed the complexity of peach tree and aphid responses to leaf N × winter pruning interactions. Simulations indicated that fruit production losses remained low within a range of realistic values of leaf N and pruning intensity, whereas manipulating peach and aphid dynamics, their interactions and their relationships to practices could result in higher losses. The model is useful to evaluate the relevance of cultural practices for a bottom-up regulation of aphid dynamics in crop–pest management. After considering other control methods and fruit quality, it can be used to find a combination of practices that optimises trade-offs between fruit production and environmental conservation goals. A modelling approach that links crop growth and pest population dynamics and integrates management practice effects has strong potential for improving crop–pest management in an integrated crop production context.
Time-varying vital rates in ecotoxicology: Selective pesticides and aphid population dynamics. Population dynamics models are useful predictive tools in applied ecology, and especially toxicological risk assessment. Many models that are useful for capturing deterministic constant-parameter dynamics are inadequate for dealing with temporally variable life history parameter values typical of many anthropogenic disturbances, including those associated with toxicological insults. Using aphid-insecticide population data as an example, here we show that constant-parameter versions of commonly used population dynamics models (a matrix model and a simple differential equation model) do not adequately capture the population dynamics of aphids subjected to a selective pesticide. However, a simple modification of the differential equation model with time-varying mortality rates provides a highly accurate fit to aphid population data. Our results suggest that variable coefficient differential equation models with time-dependent parameters provide an accurate and simple means of assessing the effects of disturbances on populations in cases where the effects of disturbance vary significantly through time. We suggest that this approach has potential for a wide range of ecological applications.
Consumption driven population dynamics (CDPD). Ecologists have long pursued a cohesive mathematical structure describing the interactions between the multitudes of species populating the web of life. Consumption dependence offers a logical approach built upon the mechanism of mass-energy flow necessary to all life processes. Consumption, defined as that fraction of satiation currently enjoyed by a local species population, will affect that population's birth rate, natural death rate, and ability to acquire food. Consumption, a non-linear function of prey population, consuming population, and the environment in which these species live, sets the level of predation forming the primary link between species. That division of environment comprising all biotic and abiotic elements aside from those directly contributing to consumption, also affects a population's welfare. The inclusion of functions of species within environment variables for other species enables modeling many interactions between species additional to predation. Many environmental elements posses a cyclic nature overlaid by stochasticity. Results generated using cyclic and stochastic variations of environmental variables have produced interesting results that may add to our understanding of persistent competition. This approach is implemented as the iterated solution to multiple difference equations, one for each included species. Resulting population curves are highly stable, or unstable depending upon conditions impacting predator proficiency, that appear remarkably like real population data recorded over the past century under both natural and laboratory conditions.
Interaction Assessment: A modeling tool for predicting population dynamics from field data. Interaction Assessment (INTASS) is a field and analytic methodology for constructing population dynamics models. Because data collected in generating a model for one species comprise much of the information needed for other species, a small increase in effort can result in simultaneous expressions for the dynamics of multiple species. These expressions can be used to simulate whole community responses to environmental change, including management actions. Since publication of the most recent paper in this series, the INTASS methodology has undergone a large number of developments. These include the use of conceptual models to direct field and modeling efforts and incorporation of an information theoretic approach to model selection. We review these modifications and additions, applying them to a population of Sitka black-tailed deer (Odocoilius hemionis) in Alaska and to cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum) at the Desert Experimental Range in Utah. In both cases, useful information about the species’ ecology and population trends was ascertained. INTASS is portable across a wide range of taxa, habitats and management situations.
Fish population dynamics in a seasonally varying wetland. Small fishes in seasonally flooded environments such as the Everglades are capable of spreading into newly flooded areas and building up substantial biomass. Passive drift cannot account for the rapidity of observed population expansions. To test the ‘reaction–diffusion’ mechanism for spread of the fish, we estimated their diffusion coefficient and applied a reaction–diffusion model. This mechanism was also too weak to account for the spatial dynamics. Two other hypotheses were tested through modeling. The first—the ‘refuge mechanism’—hypothesizes that small remnant populations of small fishes survive the dry season in small permanent bodies of water (refugia), sites where the water level is otherwise below the surface. The second mechanism, which we call the ‘dynamic ideal free distribution mechanism’ is that consumption by the fish creates a prey density gradient and that fish taxis along this gradient can lead to rapid population expansion in space. We examined the two alternatives and concluded that although refugia may play an important role in recolonization by the fish population during reflooding, only the second, taxis in the direction of the flooding front, seems capable of matching empirical observations. This study has important implications for management of wetlands, as fish biomass is an essential support of higher trophic levels.
The pattern of species turnover resulting from stochastic population dynamics: The model and field data. The model of random population dynamics in a sampling site returns geometric distribution of longevities of continuous presence (=persistence) and Poisson distribution of the presence–absence transitions. This discrete-time stochastic process describes the presence–absence pattern observed in the beetles surveyed 6 years on Mount Carmel, Israel. Homogeneous pools of species mostly on the Families rank, exhibit the predicted by the model patterns. Conformity to an ergodic hypothesis is the criterion of ecological homogeneity. This criterion assumes the equivalence of short-term behavior of entire pool and long-term behavior of any species from this pool. The pool of all 801 species of Order Coleoptera does not match the model. Thus a taxon of an arbitrary rank may not be considered a priory as a unit of ecological study. Determined from field data parameters of the model are biased and magnitude of the bias depends on longevity of the survey. Parameter of distribution depends also on species tolerance, which is the level adaptation of given species to given environment in given time interval. Random process of species turnover may be considered as a game of species to gain their presence against deteriorative fluctuations of environmental conditions.
Clustering species using a model of population dynamics and aggregation theory. The high species diversity of some ecosystems like tropical rainforests goes in pair with the scarcity of data for most species. This hinders the development of models that require enough data for fitting. The solution commonly adopted by modellers consists in grouping species to form more sizeable data sets. Classical methods for grouping species such as hierarchical cluster analysis do not take account of the variability of the species characteristics used for clustering. In this study a clustering method based on aggregation theory is presented. It takes account of the variability of species characteristics by searching for the grouping that minimizes the quadratic error (square bias plus variance) of some model’s prediction. This method allows one to check whether the gain in variance brought by data pooling compensate for the bias that it introduces. This method was applied to a data set on 94 tree species in a tropical rainforest in French Guiana, using a Usher matrix model to predict species dynamics. An optimal trade-off between bias and variance was found when grouping species. Grouping species appeared to decrease the quadratic error, except when the number of groups was very small. This clustering method yielded species groups similar to those of the hierarchical cluster analysis using Ward’s method when variance was small, that is when the number of groups was small.
The influences of climate and hydrology on population dynamics of waterbirds in the lower Murrumbidgee River floodplains in Southeast Australia: Implications for environmental water management. Restoration of waterbird diversity and abundance is a key objective of river system management in Australia. Therefore, understanding the effects of climatic and hydrological variables on waterbird population dynamics is fundamental for successful river restoration programs. We investigated the population dynamics of waterbirds (total abundance) and seven functional waterbird groups in the floodplains of lower Murrumbidgee River. We found a general declining abundance trend from 1983 to 2007, except for the deep water foragers. We modelled the relative contribution of the climatic and hydrological factors to waterbird population decrease using the generalized additive model (GAM) framework after identifying the negative binomial distribution. Most of the seven functional groups were positively related to both annual rainfall and water usage, defined as the total water volume intercepted by the river reach, and the models indicated that rainfall was slightly more important. Temperature also played a role in waterbird abundance: the maximum summer temperature negatively influenced the abundance of dabbling ducks, shoreline foragers and fish eaters, while the minimum winter temperature positively affected the abundance of dabbling ducks and shoreline foragers. Overall, our results support the practice of providing environmental water for sustaining waterbird populations. However, environmental water provision is likely to be most effective when timed to coincide with antecedent rainfall.
Fitting probability models to population dynamics data. Methods for modeling population dynamics in probability using the generalized point process approach are developed. The life history of these populations is such that seasonal reproduction occurs during a short time. Several models are developed and analyzed. Data about two species: colonial spiders (Stegodyphus dumicola) and a migratory bird (wood thrush, Hylocichla mustelina) are used to estimate model parameters with appropriate log maximum likelihood functions. For the spiders, the model is fitted to provide evolutionary feasible colony size based on maximum likelihood estimates of fecundity and survival data. For the migratory bird species, a maximum likelihood estimates are derived for the fecundity and survival rates of young and adult birds and immigration rate. The presented approach allows computation of quantities of interest such as probability of extinction and average time to extinction.
Productivity of mixed stands of Norway spruce and birch affected by population dynamics: a model analysis. Bolewood volume accumulation patterns and levels of mixed Norway spruce and birch forests in Estonia based on modelled population dynamics are discussed in this paper. Trees were divided into separate populations according to species and canopy class. Diameter growth was estimated from increment cores in ten 0.1 ha-sample plots to provide the growth component of the population model. Multiple regression was used to estimate the effect of tree attributes and stand composition on the individual tree diameter growth. The stand growth in the present model is described by modelling the growth of a mean tree of the population. Since birch has a greater diameter growth than spruce, stand productivity should increase when the birch proportion is greater. However, this conclusion is true only in middle-aged stands because more birch in a stand inhibits the diameter growth of both species. These two components (greater birch increment and growth inhibition by birch) have been quantified and the dependence of growth patterns on these factors is investigated. Trials with a simulation model demonstrate the increase in stand productivity accompanying birch population decline. Decreasing birch percentage occurs naturally in the course of secondary forest succession in Estonia.
Selecting parameters for calibration via sensitivity analysis: An individual-based model of mosquitofish population dynamics. A stochastic individual-based model (IBM) of mosquitofish population dynamics in experimental ponds was constructed in order to increase, virtually, the number of replicates of control populations in an ecotoxicology trial, and thus to increase the statistical power of the experiments. In this context, great importance had to be paid to model calibration as this conditions the use of the model as a reference for statistical comparisons. Accordingly, model calibration required that both mean behaviour and variability behaviour of the model were in accordance with real data. Currently, identifying parameter values from observed data is still an open issue for IBMs, especially when the parameter space is large. Our model included 41 parameters: 30 driving the model expectancy and 11 driving the model variability. Under these conditions, the use of “Latin hypercube” sampling would most probably have “missed” some important combinations of parameter values. Therefore, complete factorial design was preferred. Unfortunately, due to the constraints of the computational capacity, cost-acceptable “complete designs” were limited to no more than nine parameters, the calibration question becoming a parameter selection question. In this study, successive “complete designs” were conducted with different sets of parameters and different parameter values, in order to progressively narrow the parameter space. For each “complete design”, the selection of a maximum of nine parameters and their respective n values was carefully guided by sensitivity analysis. Sensitivity analysis was decisive in selecting parameters that were both influential and likely to have strong interactions. According to this strategy, the model of mosquitofish population dynamics was calibrated on real data from two different years of experiments, and validated on real data from another independent year. This model includes two categories of agents; fish and their living environment. Fish agents have four main processes: growth, survival, puberty and reproduction. The outputs of the model are the length frequency distribution of the population and the 16 scalar variables describing the fish populations. In this study, the length frequency distribution was parameterized by 10 scalars in order to be able to perform calibration. The recently suggested notion of “probabilistic distribution of the distributions” was also applied to our case study, and was shown to be very promising for comparing length frequency distributions (as such).
The use of satellite data in modeling population dynamics and prevalence of infection in the rodent reservoir of Junin virus. We present the first results of a simple numerical model of rodent population dynamics and viral infection for Junin virus, etiologic agent of Argentine hemorrhagic fever (AHF), in its host, Calomys musculinus. In contrast to the more common statistical approach, the model incorporates satellite-derived environmental data in a causal approach. In addition, the model incorporates specific biological characteristics of the host, such as birth rate and longevity. Theoretical and actual rodent population densities are compared with several years of capture data at locations on the Argentine pampas. The model appears to be a good tool for simulating dynamics of populations using remotely sensed data. Results are in agreement with field data showing maximum population densities during the autumn in most localities. The differences between simulated population densities and field observed values indicate that, although computer simulation is useful to obtain some aspects of population dynamics, improvements should be introduced in order to generate more robust results.
Modeling the population dynamics of capybara Hydrochaeris hydrochaeris: a first step towards a management plan. Capybara (Hydrochaeris hydrochaeris) is the largest living rodent, widely distributed in South America, with a considerable potential as an economic resource. There are large populations in the region of Esteros del Ibera that could be exploited in a sustainable manner and contribute positively to the development of the region. Such exploitation requires to be done responsibly and following a specially designed management plan. In the particular case of wildlife management, a sustainable exploitation of a given species requires knowledge of its dynamics, its density in the area, and its vital rates, as well as understanding how the natural environment will respond to the proposed manipulation. It is also important to determine which environmental variables lead the population dynamics in each region. A mathematical model is a very convenient tool for analyzing possible strategies. This work presents a matrix population model structured in five stages. Sensitivity and elasticity analyses of the model provide an understanding of the effects of differentiated class-dependent survival and growth probabilities on the life cycle. A harvest term has been included in the model with the purpose of evaluating the sustainability of a given exploitation scenario or comparing different harvest strategies. The different strategies depend on the exploitation pattern, the exploitation intensity, and the season in which the harvest takes place. The purpose is to formulate a simple tool that can be understood by a manager without specific training. Hence, the software interface was specially designed for a user with elementary knowledge of vital parameters of the species.
Food availability effect on population dynamics of the midge Chironomus riparius: a Leslie modeling approach. Chironomus riparius (Diptera: Chironomidae) is a non-biting midge that is widely distributed in the northern hemisphere at temperate latitudes. The larvae, which are collector-gatherer, feed on sediment-deposited detritus. Chironomidae are of clear interest in ecology and in ecotoxicology. By including the food availability in the environment, an extended Leslie matrix model was developed for a laboratory population of C. riparius. Primary non-linear models were used to relate demographic parameters to the daily food input, and to estimate input parameters of the population matrix model. Due to the food amount dependence of the fourth larval stage duration, we dealt with a Leslie matrix of variable dimension. The Leslie matrix could become irreducible but imprimitive, depending on the daily food input, thus leading to a cyclic dynamic. We first characterized the Chironomidae population dynamics under non-limiting growth conditions, in terms of asymptotic growth rate, stable stage distribution and reproductive values. Then, we studied the food availability effect on model outputs, and we underlined the particular role of the fourth larval stage duration. We thus demonstrate the efficacy of a Leslie modeling approach to include secondary models, relating input parameters to the food availability, through a set of experimental data. We conclude with the robustness of Chironomidae to limiting food conditions: the population is still growing even when the daily food input falls in a drastic way. We advocate a posteriori the pertinence of such a modeling approach to predict the future of Chironomidae field populations, and further to include pollutant effect on the population dynamics.
Long term simulations of population dynamics of Ulva r. in the lagoon of Venice. The dynamic of macroalgae is implemented in a 3D transport-water-quality model of the central part of the lagoon of Venice. Ulva biomass density and nitrogen concentration in Ulva tissue have been added to the set of state variables previously considered, that is to phytoplankton and zooplankton densities, concentrations of nutrients in water, detritus and dissolved oxygen. The model shows that Ulva succeeds in the competition with the phytoplanktonic community in the shallower areas, where water temperature and irradiance levels reaching the bottom are sufficient to sustain growth. Long term evolutions of Ulva colonies, under different scenarios of forcing functions, show that adverse meteoclimatic conditions can be more effective in reducing Ulva biomass than a consistent decrease in the loads of Nitrogen.
Population dynamics of harvested species with complex age structure (for Pacific salmons fish stocks as an example).  We study population dynamics of harvested species with complex age structure (with salmon fish stocks as an example). We describe catch size as a function of harvesting efforts and total population size. Emphasis is on the analysis of contradiction between attempts to maximize income and stability of population dynamics. Modeling results are compared to American statistical data on salmon fish harvest in Bering Sea.
Population dynamics of Oithona hebes (Copepoda: Cyclopoida) in a coastal estuarine lagoon of Venezuela: a stage-dependent matrix growth model. We study some aspects of the development and population dynamics of the copepod Oithona hebes. In this experiment, the number of individuals of different stages are monitored through 14 days. The data suggests the absence of density-dependence. A stage-dependent matrix model that predicts the number of the three stages, nauplii, copepodids, and adults, is constructed. Using experimental data we estimate the elements of the matrix model, by using regression as well as maximum likelihood methods. Finally the value of the asymptotic growth rate of the population is obtained with the eigenvalue with largest modulus of the transition matrix. We also estimate a confidence interval of the growth rate, which indicates that its difference from 1 is not statistically significant. The ecological and evolutionary implications of this finding are discussed. The predictions of a stochastic version of the model generally agree with the values experimentally obtained.
An individual based model of sea turtles: Investigating the effect of temporal variability on population dynamics. Marine turtles show great variability in annual somatic growth and reproductive performance. Fluctuated environmental conditions are closely linked with reproduction, while recent empirical information suggests the existence of a density dependent effect on somatic growth. We developed an individual based model (IBM) to simulate the effects of a varying environment on population dynamics. A density dependent effect on the age at maturity and re-nesting patterns was also examined. The model depicts units as individual animals, aggregated groups and sets of classes to explicitly incorporate behavioral and biological features of species life history. Biological features and procedures of the simulated population were modeled using parameters for the green turtle species (Chelonia mydas) derived from the literature. Temporal variability on reproductive performance was included by considering autocorrelated and randomly sequenced years indicating good and bad conditions. The analysis indicated that temporal variability could have a significant effect on population persistence. Probability of extinction varied according to fluctuated times of age at maturation and re nesting intervals. Density dependence as an additional form of temporal variability has also resulted in an increased proportion of extinction in the simulated populations. We conclude that modelling sea turtle population dynamics by the use of IBM could provide some critical insights into population dynamics, overcoming difficulties that arise from the incomplete knowledge of several aspects of species life history. We further suggest some priorities for future research at both the empirical and theoretical level.
Simulating the effects of wolf-elk population dynamics on resource flow to scavengers. The reintroduction of gray wolves to Yellowstone National Park (YNP) provides a natural experiment regarding the effects of top predators on scavenger species. Fieldwork on the Northern Range of Yellowstone indicates that wolves facilitate carrion acquisition by scavengers, but it is unclear whether this represents a transient or permanent effect of wolf reintroduction. Here we present a wolf-elk model with human elk harvest and use it to investigate the long-term consequences of predator–prey dynamics and hunting on resource flow to scavengers. Our model shows that while wolves reduce the total amount of carrion, they stabilize carrion abundance by reducing temporal variation in the quantity of carrion and extending the period over which carrion is available. Specifically, the availability of carrion is shifted from reliance on winter severity and elk density to dependence on the strength of wolf predation. Though wolves reduce the overall abundance of carrion by lowering the elk population, this reduction is partially offset by increases in the productivity of an elk population invigorated by removal of the weakest individuals. The result of this is higher carrion production per elk in the presence of wolves. In addition, this yields an ecological explanation for the phenomena that predators increase the robustness of their prey: namely that by reducing the effect of density-dependent resource competition among elk, those that remain, even some of the older animals, are better fed and healthier as a result. Our model also suggests that human hunting has no effect on the distribution of carrion across the year but is crucial in determining the long-term abundance of carrion because of the effect of hunting on elk population levels. By reducing the proportion of cows in the annual hunt, which have historically been high in order to control the number of elk migrating north of the park, managers can allow an adequate supply of carrion without substantially reducing hunter take. The effects of a more tractable food resource is likely to benefit scavengers in Yellowstone and other areas of the world where wolves have been or are currently being considered for reintroduction.
Simulating the effects of wolf-elk population dynamics on resource flow to scavengers. The reintroduction of gray wolves to Yellowstone National Park (YNP) provides a natural experiment regarding the effects of top predators on scavenger species. Fieldwork on the Northern Range of Yellowstone indicates that wolves facilitate carrion acquisition by scavengers, but it is unclear whether this represents a transient or permanent effect of wolf reintroduction. Here we present a wolf-elk model with human elk harvest and use it to investigate the long-term consequences of predator–prey dynamics and hunting on resource flow to scavengers. Our model shows that while wolves reduce the total amount of carrion, they stabilize carrion abundance by reducing temporal variation in the quantity of carrion and extending the period over which carrion is available. Specifically, the availability of carrion is shifted from reliance on winter severity and elk density to dependence on the strength of wolf predation. Though wolves reduce the overall abundance of carrion by lowering the elk population, this reduction is partially offset by increases in the productivity of an elk population invigorated by removal of the weakest individuals. The result of this is higher carrion production per elk in the presence of wolves. In addition, this yields an ecological explanation for the phenomena that predators increase the robustness of their prey: namely that by reducing the effect of density-dependent resource competition among elk, those that remain, even some of the older animals, are better fed and healthier as a result. Our model also suggests that human hunting has no effect on the distribution of carrion across the year but is crucial in determining the long-term abundance of carrion because of the effect of hunting on elk population levels. By reducing the proportion of cows in the annual hunt, which have historically been high in order to control the number of elk migrating north of the park, managers can allow an adequate supply of carrion without substantially reducing hunter take. The effects of a more tractable food resource is likely to benefit scavengers in Yellowstone and other areas of the world where wolves have been or are currently being considered for reintroduction.
Influence of host migration between woodland and pasture on the population dynamics of the tick Ixodes ricinus: A modelling approach. Ticks act as vectors of pathogens that can be harmful to animals and/or humans. Epidemiological models can be useful tools to investigate the potential effects of control strategies on diseases such as tick-borne diseases. The modelling of tick population dynamics is a prerequisite to simulating tick-borne diseases and the corresponding spread of the pathogen. We have developed a dynamic model to simulate changes in tick density at different stages (egg, larva, nymph and adult) under the influence of temperature. We have focused on the tick Ixodes ricinus, which is widespread in Europe. The main processes governing the biological cycles of ticks were taken into account: egg laying, hatching, development, host (small, mainly rodents, or large, like deer and cattle, mammals) questing, feeding and mortality. This model was first applied to a homogeneous habitat, where simulations showed the ability of the model to reproduce the general patterns of tick population dynamics. We considered thereafter a multi-habitat model, where three different habitats (woodland, ecotone and meadow) were connected through host migration. Based on this second application, it appears that migration from woodland, via the ecotone, is necessary to sustain the presence of ticks in the meadow. Woodland can therefore be considered as a source of ticks for the meadow, which in turn can be regarded as a sink. The influence of woodland on surrounding tick densities increases in line with the area of this habitat before reaching a plateau. A sensitivity analysis to parameter values was carried out and demonstrated that demographic parameters (sex ratio, development, mortality during feeding and questing, host finding) played a crucial role in the determination of questing nymph densities. This type of modelling approach provides insight into the influence of spatial heterogeneity on tick population dynamics.
Modeling individual and population dynamics in a consumer–resource system: Behavior under food limitation and crowding and the effect on population cycling in Daphnia. In population modeling, a considerable level of complexity is often required to provide trustworthy results, comparable with field observations. By assuring sufficient detail at the individual level while preserving the potential to explore the consequences at higher levels, individual-based modeling may thus provide a useful tool to investigate dynamics at different levels of organization. Still, population dynamics resulting from such models are often at odds with observations from the field. This may be partly caused by a lack of focus on the individual dynamics under conditions of food stress and starvation. I developed a physiologically structured, individual-based simulation model to investigate life history of Daphnia and its effect on population dynamics in response to the productivity of the system. In verifying model behavior with available literature data on life history and physiology, I paid special attention to the dynamics of food intake and the verification of individual level results under conditions of food limitation and starvation. I show that the maximum filtering rates under low food levels used in the current model are much closer to measured filtering rates than the ones used in other models. Being consistent with results on physiology and life history from experiments at a wide range of food availability (including starvation), the model generates low amplitude or high amplitude population density cycles depending on the productivity of the system, as observed in field and experimental populations of Daphnia and with the minimum population densities being one to two orders of magnitude lower in the high amplitude than in the low amplitude cycles. To generate results which are not only qualitatively but also quantitatively comparable to experimental and field observations, however, a crowding effect on the filtering response has to be incorporated in the model.
Identification of the inland population dynamics of the European eel using pattern-oriented modelling. We propose a process-based model (GlobAng) for the population dynamics of the continental phase of the European eel based on an ecological pattern derived from knowledge in the existing literature. This model simulates ageing, recruitment, sexual differentiation, silvering, natural mortality and, for the first time, movement within a watershed. It demonstrates that it is possible to simulate the pattern of density-dependent mortality, density-dependent sexual determination and diffusive movements. The downstream part of the watershed appears to be the area of maximum production for both males and females and where sexual differentiation takes place, especially when recruitment is low. The quality of the pattern is discussed in relation to the modelling results and field observations. The consequences of our findings for primary management are to advise concentrating mitigation efforts on the downstream part of the catchment area.
The impact of behavioral plasticity at individual level on domestic cat population dynamics. An extension of a model studying the population dynamic consequences of intra-individual variability in behavior is presented. Individuals can adopt three different tactics: hawk, dove and bully. We consider a population of individuals that compete for some resources. The same individual experiences the different tactics in his life and it is assumed that the game is played at a fast time scale in comparison to population dynamics. This fast part of the model is coupled to a slow part, which describes the growth of each sub-population. By use of aggregation methods, we obtain an equation governing the total population at the slow time scale. This equation is a logistic one whose r and K parameters are related to the payoff of the tactics. The model is applied to the case of domestic cat populations. Results show that the highest population density corresponding to urban environment is reached when all individuals are bully. We also obtain a gradient from rural to urban environments, respectively corresponding to aggressive to non-aggressive individuals. The results of the model are consistent with empirical data: high-density populations of domestic cats are mainly bullies, whereas low-density populations are mainly hawks.
