The absolute photoabsorption cross section and the photoionization quantum efficiency of nitrogen have been measured using a double ion chamber and monochromated synchrotron radiation. In the wavelength range encompassed by the present study, several well-established Rydberg series give rise to prominent structure in the absorption spectrum. A molecule excited into a Rydberg state may decay either by autoionization or by predissociation into neutral products, and this competition between de-excitation processes causes variations to be observed in the photoionization quantum efficiency. The results indicate that many of the Rydberg states undergo rapid predissociation. A sum rule analysis has been carried out by combining the present absolute photoabsorption cross section with similar data covering the remaining wavelength regions.
The absolute photoabsorption, photoionization and photodissociation cross sections and the photoionization quantum efficiency of oxygen have been measured using a double ion chamber and monochromated synchrotron radiation. In addition to structure associated with well established Rydberg series, some new features have been observed which are interpreted in terms of transitions into Rydberg states converging onto the 3 2Πu ionization threshold. The photoionization quantum efficiency measurements indicate that the decay of Rydberg states by dissociation into neutral products is a significant de-excitation route, particularly for the low vibrational members of the H 3Πu state. A sum rule analysis has been carried out by combining the present absolute photoabsorption measurements with similar data covering the remaining wavelength regions.
The photoabsorption cross sections for H2S were measured in the 47–102 nm region using synchrotron radiation. The absorption cross section in the range of λ > 90 nm showed many small peaks assigned to the 5a1 → 6sa1 Rydberg transition. and in the 77–90 nm region the 2b2 → nda1 (n = 4.5) Rydberg series were observed. At the energies of 18.2. 19.5 and 21.1 eV, small broad peaks were recognized and tentatively assigned to the vertical ionization potentials of the 14A2, 4B1 and 24A2 electronic states of the H2S+ ion, respectively, by comparing with the recent ab initio calculations for the H2S+ energy diagram.
autoionizing transitions. This is supported by constant ion state (CIS) spectroscopy. A large enhancement of the transitions to the and states is ascribed to important autoionizing contributions. Based on the present calculations, the weak to very weak bands in the 17.5–22.0 eV photon energy range were mainly assigned to ionization and to double excitations described essentially by the and configurations. The photoionization mass spectrometric study allowed us to investigate in detail the ionization and dissociation of CH3Br+ leading to , , Br+ and CH2Br+ from threshold up to 20 eV photon energy. The experimental data are compared to ab initio dissociation energies. At the onset, the and CH2Br+ fragment ion production is correlated with the ground state of CH3Br+ and both fragment ions have to appear through dissociative autoionization from the or 5s Rydberg state. This interpretation is supported by the photoabsorption spectrum measured recently in the same photon energy range. At higher energies, beside a likely direct (pre)dissociation of the and states of CH3Br+, autoionization also contributes to the fragmentation in all decay channels. Avoided crossings in a manifold of 2A′ states are likely to be involved. This is supported by ab initio calculations. For the photoion-pair process is analyzed and detailed assignments are proposed on the basis of our latest VUV photoabsorption spectroscopic data.
We have measured the threshold photoelectron spectra of HCl and DCl with varying resolution (3–40 meV) using tunable synchrotron radiation and employing the penetrating-field electron-spectroscopic technique over a wide photon energy range (up to 34 eV) that includes the inner-valence ionization region in the molecules. The observed spectra display features produced by both direct ionization and autoionization processes. Autoionization is found to play a particularly important role in the outer-valence ionization region of these molecules. For example, in the formation of the v+=0 band of the X (2Π3/2) subsystem, in the populating of high vibrational levels of the X (2Πi) system in the Franck–Condon gap region between the X (2Πi) and A (2Σ+) states, and in the predissociated levels of the A (2Σ+) state. The production of extended vibrational structure in the X (2Πi) system is attributed to resonance autoionization of 4sσ, 5sσ and 6sσ 1Σ+ Rydberg states. These and other threshold photoelectron results suggest a propensity for threshold electron production from sσ Rydberg states. Photoionization of HCl and DCl in the inner-valence ionization region between 25 and 30 eV yields nine vibrationally resolved band systems that include the `main line' 3sσ−1 band system and four sets of pairs of vibrationally very similar satellite ion systems. Absolute vibrational numbering in these systems was greatly facilitated by having the isotopomer threshold photoelectron spectra.
Dispersed fluorescence spectroscopy has been employed to study vibrational selectivity accompanying electronic autoionisation in N2O. Vibrationally resolved fluorescence excitation spectra of the transition have been recorded in the photon energy range 16.2–20.7 eV to monitor the formation of (0 0 0), (1 0 0), (2 0 0), (0 0 1) and (1 0 1) state ions. The spectra exhibit prominent structure due to autoionisation from Rydberg states belonging to series converging onto the (0 0 0) limit. Of the five series converging onto this limit, the most significant enhancement in the population of vibrationally excited state ions occurs via autoionisation from the ndσ or ndπ series. Within a single Rydberg series, the degree of vibrational enhancement varies considerably with principal quantum number. Previously unobserved bands in the dispersed fluorescence spectrum have been assigned using energy levels determined in photoelectron spectroscopic studies.
We have performed time-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy and mass spectrometry experiments to address the dynamics that result when gaseous acetone molecules are excited with femtosecond pulses in the 253–288 nm wavelength range. There are several previous examples of time-resolved mass spectrometry experiments and our results are in line with previously published data. However, the results of the photoelectron spectroscopy experiments allow us to show that the ultrafast dynamics related to the S1 state can be attributed entirely to photo-physical processes. In essence, the dynamics that is induced by a one-photon excitation is governed by the motion out of the Franck–Condon region on the S1 surface to the relaxed geometry in less than 30 fs. The relaxed S1 species does not decay in 100 ps and actual C−C bond breakage must take place on a longer time scale.
Mass analyzed threshold ionization spectroscopy is a versatile technique to measure vibrational spectra of the electronic ground state of polyatomic molecular ions and their complexes with noble gas atoms. The method is based on the separation of promptly produced ions from molecules in high long-lived Rydberg states converging to a selected ionization threshold. After field ionization of the Rydberg states molecular ions in defined vibrational states are produced. We demonstrate for the first time that the so produced threshold ions can be trapped and stored in an electrodynamical ion trap without any background from non-energy-selected prompt ions. As a new result the van der Waals vibrations of the fluorobenzene-Ar complex cation are presented and compared with the respective vibrations in the neutral complex. While the frequency of the stretching mode increases after ionization of the complex, the long axis in-plane bending mode is strongly reduced in frequency. Excitation to vibrational states with more than 543 cm−1 leads to a dissociation of the complex cations and to the appearance of daughter (fluorobenzene) threshold ions. The dissociation energy of the ionic complex E0 ≈ 543 cm−1 and the respective value of the neutral complex is d0 ≈ 321 cm−1.
The observed structure in the ionization cross section just above the threshold has been attributed to the formation of auto-ionizing Rydberg states. The calculation of the auto-ionization rates is discussed in terms of the breakdown of the Born-Oppenheimer approximation. Three aspects are examined qualitatively, the variation of decay rate with principal quantum number, the magnitude of the decay rate, and the competition between auto-ionization and pre-dissociation. It is found that the states are all narrow and that the widths decrease with increasing principal quantum number.
The pair formation of positive and negative fragment ions has been studied in the vacuum ultraviolet region of NO, with negative ion imaging spectroscopy. The negative ion yield curve obtained in the photon energy region of 19–25 eV exhibits many structures which are absent from the photoabsorption spectrum in the same region. The partial yields and asymmetry parameters associated with the dissociations into individual ion pair limits have been extracted from the negative ion images observed. On the basis of these quantities, the assignments for the structures exhibited on the negative ion yield curve are given and the dynamical properties on the ion pair dissociation are discussed.
Resonantly enhanced multiphoton ionization-photoelectron spectroscopy was used to study rotational and vibrational autoionization of np Rydberg states of H2 between the H2+, X 2Σg+, ν+ = 2, N+ = 1 and N+ = 3 thresholds. In this two-color experiment, one laser was used to excite the two-photon transition to the E,F 1Σg+, ν′ = E2, J′ = 1 intermediate state, and a second laser was used to access the autoionizing Rydberg states. Significant differences in lineshapes were observed for the H2+ X 2Σg+, ν+ = 1 and ν+ = 2 decay channels. This is the first direct observation of the competition between these autoionization mechanisms, and the results confirm qualitative features of a recent mutichannel quantum defect theory calculation.
The relative photoion yield curves of Cl+2, Cl− and Cl+ from Cl2 (normalized to absolute cross sections) are presented, from threshold to 740 Å. A structured spectrum involving the formation of Cl+—Cl− ion pairs, and amounting to ≈ 1% of total ionization, extends from its threshold to ≈ 750 Å. The spectrum is divided into four distinct bands. The two lowest in energy must correlate with Cl+(3P) + Cl−(1S). The other two are inferred to have Cl+(1D) and Cl+(1S) asymptotes, respectively. The fine structure observed implies predissociation of photoexcited Rydberg states by ion-pair states. The Rydberg states can be assigned by their absolute energies, vibrational spacings and vibrational envelopes. The lowest-energy ion-pair band can be observed at least 0.16 eV below its thermochemical threshold at 300 K. This band has a pronounced temperature effect, which can be interpreted as an example of heterogeneous predissociation. The contribution to Cl+ from dissociative ionization rapidly overwhelms the ion-pair component below 802.5 Å, the dissociative ionization threshold.
Photoionization and photodissociation processes of SO2 and CS2 in vacuum UV are studied by using two-dimensional photoelectron spectroscopy with a monochromatized synchrotron radiation source. The principal focus is on the mechanisms of autoionization and neutral dissociation of superexcited states. Photoelectron spectra of SO2 exhibit characteristic peaks at the electron kinetic energy below 1.8 eV which are assigned as resulting from autoionizing transitions of excited atomic sulfur, S*, into the ground S+(4S°) state. These S* atoms are in the singlet Rydberg states converging to S+(2D°). The precursor molecular states, SO2*, are considered to be multiple-electron excited Rydberg states lying at the photon energy above ∼22 eV. The onset of the photoelectron yield due to the atomic autoionization accords with that expected from the thermochemical threshold for the formation of S* through three-body dissociation SO2*→S*+O+O. The two-dimensional photoelectron spectrum of CS2 provides tangible evidence for the formation of a dipole-forbidden Rydberg state (6σg)−1(3dσg)11Σg+ at the photon energy of 14.88 eV which autoionizes into the v3=1 vibrational state of the antisymmetric stretch ν3 mode of CS2+ (X2Πg,Ω, Ω=1/2 and 3/2). This Rydberg state is expected to borrow substantial oscillator strength from the (6σg)−1(5pσu)11Σu+ state through vibronic coupling involving the ν3 vibration.
Fast intramolecular radiationless decay processes which compete with autoionization in the decay of high Rydberg levels of polyatomic molecules are taken into account by an absorptive imaginary part of the reactance matrix in the multi-channel-quantum-defect-type (MQDT) formalism. Calculations for a simple model involving two electronic ionization continua and a single vibrational mode reveal a dramatic impact of the decay processes on the near-threshold ionization cross section, in particular, a strong suppression of autoionizing series. The model calculations provide a semiquantitative explanation of the characteristic features of autoionization spectra recently obtained by two-color near-threshold photoionization in several polyatomic molecules.
The absolute photoabsorption cross section of ethylene sulphide has been measured between threshold and 30 eV using monochromated synchrotron radiation. Below the ionisation threshold the spectrum exhibits numerous sharp peaks associated with Rydberg states belonging to series converging onto the limit. At excitation energies above the ionisation threshold at 9 eV intravalence transitions play a dominant role, resulting in the appearance of prominent broad bands. Much weaker structure ascribed to Rydberg states associated with excitation from the 4b2, 8a1 or 2b1 orbitals is also discernible. Ab initio multireference configuration interaction calculations have been performed to obtain excitation energies for valence electron transitions into Rydberg or virtual valence orbitals. These theoretical predictions have enabled assignments to be proposed for most of the structure due to Rydberg series converging onto the limit. The calculations show that configuration interaction is important in the description of many of the excited states.
Photoabsorption and fluorescence cross sections of methanol vapor were mearured using synchrotron radiation. Weak structures observed in the 110–140 nm region are classified into three Rydberg series. Quasidiatomic repulsive potential curves for the states dissociating into CH3 + OH(A2Σ+) are obtained from the measured fluorescence cross section. The photodissociation processes are discussed in accord with the fluorescence observed. The fluorescence quantum yield (< 0.8%) for photodissociation of CH3OH is one order of magnitude smaller than that of H2O, indicating a correlation that the fluorescence quantum yield decreases with increasing number of molecular orbitals.
The absolute photoabsorption, photoionisation and photodissociation cross sections and the photoionisation quantum efficiency of carbon dioxide have been measured using a double ion chamber and monochromated synchrotron radiation. In addition to structure associated with well established Rydberg series, some new features have been observed which are interpreted in terms of transitions into Rydberg states converging onto the C 2Σg+ ν1+ = 1, ν2+ = 0, ν3+ = 1 threshold. The photoionisation quantum efficiency measurements indicate that the decay of Rydberg states by dissociation into neutral products is a significant de-excitation route. Rydberg states belonging to the Henning sharp series are strongly predissociated, whereas autoionisation is the dominant decay mechanism for states associated with the Henning diffuse series. The photodissociation cross section is compared to the CO A 1π → X 1Σ+ fluorescence spectrum produced through photodissociation of CO2, and many similarities are apparent. A sum rule analysis has been carried out by combining the present absolute photoabsorption measurements with similar data covering the remaining wavelength regions.
The combination of resonance enhanced multiphoton ionization (REMPI) and photoelectron Spectroscopy (PES) provides a powerful probe of the decay dynamics of highly excited molecular states. In REMPI, an excited state is prepared by the absorption of one or more photons and is then photoionized before it can decay. This process directly probes the photoionization dynamics of the excited resonant intermediate state; furthermore, if an independently tunable laser is used for the ionization step, the resulting double resonance process can selectively excite quasibound autoionizing states in the ionization continuum. In either case, the choice of the intermediate state enables significant control over the excitation process, including which final states can be accessed and which region of internuclear separation is probed. Photoelectron Spectroscopy can be used to characterize the dynamics of the ionization process through measurement of, e.g., photoionization branching ratios and photoelectron angular distributions. Recent REMPI-PES studies on H2 serve to illustrate the use of multiphoton techniques to access new information on electronic, vibrational, and rotational autoionization mechanisms.
Two new Rydberg series in H2S and D2S habe been characterized as three-photon resonances in four-photon ionisation spectrometry. Members of the two series exhibit sufficient rotational structure to permit characterisation of their electronic symmetries as, respectively. A2 and B1. The first Rydberg series is identified with the (one-photon forbidden) excitations npb2 ← 2b1 (1A2 ← X1A1) on the basis of the observed quantum defects. Geometry considerations indicate that second series, of 1B1 states, also arises as a result of electronic promotion from the highest occupied 2b1 orbital. The acceptor (a1) Rydberg orbitals possess substanial s character, but the polarisation dependence of the various 1B1-X1A1 three-photon transition probabilities their hybrid I character, d (and quite possibly p) functions contribute also. The results provide further clear demonstration of the way in which multiphoton excitations, and MPI techniques in particular, can complement conventional one-photon absorption techniques. Members of both series are predissociated. Vibronic predissociation rates are found generally to decline with increasing n and to be slower in D2S than in H2S. The lowest (n = 4) member of the 1A2 series in both isotopic species appears immune from rovibronic predissociation but higher members show evidence of a (Ja2)-dependent rotationally-induced predissociation, the severity of which increases dramatically with n. This observation is explained in terms of electronic-rotational Coriolis coupling to a dissociated 1B2 state is presumed to be responsible for the observed (Jb2)-dependent heterogeneous predissociation of the 1B1 (n = 6) member in H2S. However, the dominant rotationally-induced predissociation mechanism that affects the counterpart in D2S scales with (Ja2). Wherever possible comparisons are drawn with the known spectroscopy and photophysics of the isovalent molecules H2O and D2O.
The molecular and dissociative photoionization of C2H2 and C2H4 has been studied using synchrotron radiation within the energy range 11–30 eV. Positive and negative photoion mass spectra have been obtained. Appearance thresholds for the formation of fragment ions have been determined and are compared with the thermochemical values. Above threshold it is shown that superexcited states, involving intravalence transitions and shape resonances which can decay through ion pair formation, play an important role in the photodissociative ionization process. The positive photoion yield curves display significant hitherto unobserved structures, which are unrelated to those present in the photoelectron spectra.
The occurrence of radicals in various reactive environments and the importance of the ionization energy as a thermochemical property has motivated a large number of experiments on radicals using photoelectron-spectroscopy (PES). In this review we summarize and discuss PES of radicals performed at a resolution of better than 1 meV, with a focus on experiments applying zero kinetic energy (ZEKE)-spectroscopy and other methods based on the pulsed field ionization (PFI) of molecular Rydberg states. The basic physics of PFI, as well as the typical experimental set-up will be described. Subsequently the spectra of selected radicals will be discussed, emphasizing the scientific interest motivating the experiments. Particular attention is given to the methods used to generate the respective radical.
Mass analyzed threshold ionization is based on the laser excitation of high long-lived Rydberg states 5–15 cm−1 below a selected ionization threshold. Separating the Rydberg molecules from promptly produced ions in a delayed pulsed field ionization scheme leads to state and energy selected ions that are mass analyzed in a time-of-flight mass spectrometer. We present vibrational ion spectra of various clusters of indole, phenol and 1-naphthol. Because of the mass selectivity dissociation thresholds of the clusters can be measured when the ion internal energy is increased and a breakdown of the parent ion signal caused by dissociation is observed. We compare results for van der Waals with hydrogen bond energies and find a strong increase for the latter in the ionized cluster. Experimental results are explained by changes of the electron density distribution in the molecules after clustering and ionization. The influence of the size of the aromatic part of a molecule on the strength of the hydrogen bonding to an attached water molecule is investigated for the neutral as well as for the ionized molecules. In ionic clusters, we observe a decrease of hydrogen bond strength with an increasing number of aromatic rings in the chromophor, whereas the neutral binding energy increases in this case.
Photoabsorption and fluorescence cross sections of methanol vapor were mearured using synchrotron radiation. Weak structures observed in the 110–140 nm region are classified into three Rydberg series. Quasidiatomic repulsive potential curves for the states dissociating into CH3 + OH(A2Σ+) are obtained from the measured fluorescence cross section. The photodissociation processes are discussed in accord with the fluorescence observed. The fluorescence quantum yield (< 0.8%) for photodissociation of CH3OH is one order of magnitude smaller than that of H2O, indicating a correlation that the fluorescence quantum yield decreases with increasing number of molecular orbitals.
Two new Rydberg series in H2S and D2S habe been characterized as three-photon resonances in four-photon ionisation spectrometry. Members of the two series exhibit sufficient rotational structure to permit characterisation of their electronic symmetries as, respectively. A2 and B1. The first Rydberg series is identified with the (one-photon forbidden) excitations npb2 ← 2b1 (1A2 ← X1A1) on the basis of the observed quantum defects. Geometry considerations indicate that second series, of 1B1 states, also arises as a result of electronic promotion from the highest occupied 2b1 orbital. The acceptor (a1) Rydberg orbitals possess substanial s character, but the polarisation dependence of the various 1B1-X1A1 three-photon transition probabilities their hybrid I character, d (and quite possibly p) functions contribute also. The results provide further clear demonstration of the way in which multiphoton excitations, and MPI techniques in particular, can complement conventional one-photon absorption techniques. Members of both series are predissociated. Vibronic predissociation rates are found generally to decline with increasing n and to be slower in D2S than in H2S. The lowest (n = 4) member of the 1A2 series in both isotopic species appears immune from rovibronic predissociation but higher members show evidence of a (Ja2)-dependent rotationally-induced predissociation, the severity of which increases dramatically with n. This observation is explained in terms of electronic-rotational Coriolis coupling to a dissociated 1B2 state is presumed to be responsible for the observed (Jb2)-dependent heterogeneous predissociation of the 1B1 (n = 6) member in H2S. However, the dominant rotationally-induced predissociation mechanism that affects the counterpart in D2S scales with (Ja2). Wherever possible comparisons are drawn with the known spectroscopy and photophysics of the isovalent molecules H2O and D2O.
The VUV photoabsorption spectrum of dichlorine monoxide has been recorded between 6.5 and 9.7 eV photon energies using the UK Daresbury Synchrotron Radiation facility. The spectrum consists of a broad structureless band centred at 7.25 eV followed by several vibrationally resolved high-intensity bands. The 7.25 eV band has been interpreted in terms of the excitation of a dissociative valence excited state while the higher-energy electronic bands (above 7.5 eV) have been classified into several (n = 3, 4) Rydberg states linked with the ionic ground state and its lowest-energy excited states. An analysis of the vibrational progressions associated with the excitation of the various Rydberg states has been completed.
