Omentum metastasis is a common occurrence in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC), which is often accompanied by ascites that facilitates the spread of EOC cells. A subpopulation of fibroblasts-the cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are important promoters of tumor progression. We have shown previously that CAFs exist not only in omentum with EOC metastasis but also in omentum without metastasis. In the present study, using primary human fibroblasts isolated from normal omentum (NFs) and omentum with ovarian cancer metastasis (CAFs), we established in vitro coculture models and a 3D culture model mimicking human omentum structure for investigation of interactions between fibroblasts and cancer cells. We demonstrate that EOC cells activate NFs and promote their proliferation via transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1) signaling, and the activated fibroblasts contribute to the invasion and adhesion of EOC cells. Moreover, EOC cells and NFs coculture led to overexpression of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) and adhesion and invasion of EOC cells could be partially suppressed by blocking the function of HGF or MMP-2. Additionally, mouse peritoneal dissemination models of EOC confirmed the activation of fibroblasts by cancer cells and the tumor growth- and metastasis-promoting effects of activated fibroblasts in vivo. Our findings indicate that activated fibroblasts in omentum form a congenial environment to promote EOC cells implantation. It is an intriguing concept that targeting the activation of omentum fibroblast through the inhibition of TGF-β1 signaling can be used as a new therapeutic strategy against ovarian cancer omentum metastases, which needs further study.
Ovarian cancer is the most common cause of death from gynecological cancer. Understanding the biology of this disease, particularly how tumor-associated lymphocytes and fibroblasts contribute to the progression and metastasis of the tumor, has been impeded by the lack of a suitable tumor xenograft model. We report a simple and reproducible system in which the tumor and tumor stroma are successfully engrafted into NOD-scid IL2Rγ(null) (NSG) mice. This is achieved by injecting tumor cell aggregates derived from fresh ovarian tumor biopsy tissues (including tumor cells, and tumor-associated lymphocytes and fibroblasts) i.p. into NSG mice. Tumor progression in these mice closely parallels many of the events that are observed in ovarian cancer patients. Tumors establish in the omentum, ovaries, liver, spleen, uterus, and pancreas. Tumor growth is initially very slow and progressive within the peritoneal cavity with an ultimate development of tumor ascites, spontaneous metastasis to the lung, increasing serum and ascites levels of CA125, and the retention of tumor-associated human fibroblasts and lymphocytes that remain functional and responsive to cytokines for prolonged periods. With this model one will be able to determine how fibroblasts and lymphocytes within the tumor microenvironment may contribute to tumor growth and metastasis, and will make it possible to evaluate the efficacy of therapies that are designed to target these cells in the tumor stroma.
RCAS1 is involved in generating the suppressive profile of the tumor microenvironment that helps cancer cells evade immune surveillance. The status of the cells surrounding the cancer nest may affect both the progression of the cancer and the development of metastases. In cases of ovarian cancer, a large number of patients do not respond to the applied therapy. The patient's response to the applied therapy is directly linked to the status of the tumor microenvironment and the intensity of its suppressive profile. We analyzed the immunoreactivity of RCAS1 on the cells present in the ovarian cancer microenvironment in patients with the disease; these cells included macrophages and carcinoma-associated fibroblasts. Later we analyzed the immunoreactivity levels within these cells, taking into consideration the clinical stage of the cancer and the therapeutic strategy applied, such as the number of chemotherapy regiments, primary cytoreductive surgery, or the presence of advanced ascites. In the patients who did not respond to the therapy we observed significantly higher immunoreactivity levels of RCAS1 within the cancer nest than in those patients who did respond; moreover, in the non-responsive patients we found RCAS1 within both macrophages and carcinoma-associated fibroblasts. RCAS1 staining may provide information about the intensity of the immuno-suppressive microenvironment profile found in cases of ovarian cancer and its intensity may directly relate to the clinical outcome of the disease.
A close relationship between tumor angiogenesis, growth, and carcinomatosis has been observed. Netrin-4 (NT-4) has been shown to regulate angiogenic responses. We aimed to examine the effects of NT-4 on colon tumor angiogenesis, growth, and carcinomatosis. We showed that NT-4 was expressed in human colon cancer cells (LS174). A 20-fold increase in NT-4 expression was stably induced by NT-4 pcDNA in LS174 cells. In vivo, a Matrigel angiogenesis assay showed that NT-4 overexpression altered vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)/basic fibroblast growth factor-induced angiogenesis. In nude mice with LS174 xenografts, NT-4 overexpression inhibited tumor angiogenesis and growth. In addition, these NT-4-involved inhibitory effects were associated with decreased tumor cell proliferation and increased tumor cell apoptosis. Using an orthotopic peritoneal carcinomatosis model, we demonstrated that NT-4 overexpression decreased colorectal cancer carcinomatosis. Moreover, carcinomatosis-related ascites formation was significantly decreased in mice transplanted with NT-4 LS174 cells versus control LS174 cells. The antiangiogenic activity of NT-4 was probably mediated by binding to its receptor neogenin. Netrin-4 had a direct effect on neither in vitro apoptosis and proliferation of cultured LS174 cells nor the VEGF-induced acute increase in vascular permeability in vivo. We propose that NT-4 overexpression decreases tumor growth and carcinomatosis, probably via an antiangiogenic effect, underlying the potential therapeutic interest in NT-4 in the treatment of colorectal cancer growth and carcinomatosis.
Long-term osmotic stress results in altered gene transcription, however, with the exception of the TonE/TonEBP system, the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. We previously showed that upon osmotic shrinkage of Ehrlich Lettré Ascites (ELA) fibroblasts, the MEK1-ERK1/2 pathway is transiently inhibited while p38 MAPK is activated, in turn impacting on cell survival (Pedersen et al., 2007, Cell Physiol Biochem 20: 735-750). Here, we show that downstream of these kinases, two transcription factors with major roles in control of cell proliferation and death, serum response factor (SRF) and cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) are differentially regulated in ELA cells. SRF Ser(103) phosphorylation and SRF-dependent transcriptional activity were strongly augmented 5-30 min and 24 h, respectively, after hyperosmotic stress (50% increase in extracellular ionic strength), in a p38 MAPK-dependent manner. In contrast, CREB Ser(133) was transiently dephosphorylated upon osmotic shrinkage. The ERK1/2 effector ribosomal S kinase (RSK) and the ERK1/2- and p38 MAPK effector mitogen- stress-activated protein kinase 1 (MSK1) both phosphorylate CREB at Ser(133) . RSK and MSK1 were dephosphorylated within 5 min of shrinkage. MSK1 phosphorylation recovered within 30 min in a p38-MAPK-dependent manner. CREB was transiently dephosphorylated after shrinkage in a manner exacerbated by p38 MAPK inhibition or MSK1 knockdown, but unaffected by inhibition of RSK. In conclusion, in ELA cells, hyperosmotic stress activates SRF in a p38 MAPK-dependent manner and transiently inactivates CREB, likely due to MSK1 inactivation. We suggest that these events contribute to shrinkage-induced changes in gene transcription and death/survival balance.
Increased expression of the ubiquitous serine/threonine protein kinase CK2 has been associated with increased proliferative capacity and increased resistance towards apoptosis. Taurine is the primary organic osmolyte involved in cell volume control in mammalian cells, and shift in cell volume is a critical step in cell proliferation, differentiation and induction of apoptosis. In the present study, we use mouse NIH3T3 fibroblasts and Ehrlich Lettré ascites tumour cells with different CK2 expression levels. Taurine uptake via the Na(+) dependent transporter TauT and taurine release are increased and reduced, respectively, following pharmacological CK2 inhibition. The effect of CK2 inhibition on TauT involves modulation of transport kinetics, whereas the effect on the taurine release pathway involves reduction in the open-probability of the efflux pathway. Stimulation of PLA(2) activity, exposure to exogenous reactive oxygen species as well as inhibition of protein tyrosine phosphotases (PTP) potentiate the swelling-induced taurine loss. Inhibition of PI3K and PTEN reduces and potentiates swelling-induced taurine release, respectively. Inhibition of CK2 has no effect on PLA(2) activity and ROS production by NADPH oxidase, whereas it lifts the effect of PTEN and PTP inhibition. It is suggested that CK2 regulates the taurine release downstream to known swelling-induced signal transducers including PLA(2), NADPH oxidase and PI3K.
Addition of H(2)O(2) (0.5 mM) to Ehrlich ascites tumor cells under isotonic conditions results in a substantial (22 +/- 1%) reduction in cell volume within 25 min. The cell shrinkage is paralleled by net loss of K(+), which was significant within 8 min, whereas no concomitant increase in the K(+) or Cl(-) conductances could be observed. The H(2)O(2)-induced cell shrinkage was unaffected by the presence of clofilium and clotrimazole, which blocks volume-sensitive and Ca(2+)-activated K(+) channels, respectively, and is unaffected by a raise in extracellular K(+) concentration to a value that eliminates the electrochemical driving force for K(+). On the other hand, the H(2)O(2)-induced cell shrinkage was impaired in the presence of the KCl cotransport inhibitor (dihydro-indenyl)oxyalkanoic acid (DIOA), following substitution of NO(3)(-) for Cl(-), and when the driving force for KCl cotransport was omitted. It is suggested that H(2)O(2) activates electroneutral KCl cotransport in Ehrlich ascites tumor cells and not K(+) and Cl(-) channels. Addition of H(2)O(2) to hypotonically exposed cells accelerates the regulatory volume decrease and the concomitant net loss of K(+), whereas no additional increase in the K(+) and Cl(-) conductance was observed. The effect of H(2)O(2) on cell volume was blocked by the serine-threonine phosphatase inhibitor calyculin A, indicating an important role of serine-threonine phosphorylation in the H(2)O(2)-mediated activation of KCl cotransport in Ehrlich cells. In contrast, addition of H(2)O(2) to adherent cells, e.g., Ehrlich Lettré ascites cells, a subtype of the Ehrlich ascites tumor cells, and NIH3T3 mouse fibroblasts increased the K(+) and Cl(-) conductances after hypotonic cell swelling. Hence, H(2)O(2) induces KCl cotransport or K(+) and Cl(-) channels in nonadherent and adherent cells, respectively.
Bradykinin is an endothelium-dependent vasodilator and inflammatory mediator. The aim of the present study was to examine the effects of bradykinin on peripheral vascular tone in patients with cirrhosis and ascites. Forearm blood flow was measured using venous occlusion plethysmography in 8 patients with biopsy-proven alcohol-induced cirrhosis, ascites, and portal hypertension, and 8 age- and sex-matched healthy controls. On 1 occasion, subjects received an intrabrachial infusion of the selective bradykinin antagonist B9340 (1.5-13.5 nmol/min) followed by a control vasoconstrictor norepinephrine (60-540 pmol/min), and on another occasion bradykinin (100-900 pmol/min) followed by the endothelium-independent vasodilator, sodium nitroprusside (SNP, 2-8 microg/min). Bradykinin and SNP caused a dose-dependent vasodilatation (P < 0.001 for both) that did not differ between the 2 groups. Although norepinephrine caused a similar dose-dependent vasoconstriction in both groups (P < 0.001), B9340 had no effect on forearm blood flow in either group (at 13.5 nmol/min in patients; -5%, 95% CI -13-3). Bradykinin does not provide a major contribution to the maintenance of peripheral vascular tone in patients with cirrhosis and ascites. Our findings also suggest that, in contrast to cardiovascular disease, patients with liver cirrhosis do not have marked endothelial dysfunction.
A 70-year-old man was seen in a hospital consultation for evaluation of cellulitis of the left arm. The patient had multiple medical problems, including advanced liver disease due to alcohol, diabetes mellitus, congestive heart failure, atrial fibrillation, chronic renal in sufficiency, and hypopituitarism requiring steroid replacement. Most recently, he was admitted to the intensive care unit, where he required intubation and mechanical ventilation support following respiratory failure secondary to pneumonia. At that time, an attempt was also made to place an arterial line in the left radial artery. The patient had multiple areas of ecchymosis on both arms. A large bulla was found on the lateral aspect of the left wrist several days after the attempted arterial line placement. Subsequently, the lesion drained serosanguineous fluid, and, during the next 2 days, it ulcerated with necrosis extending around the wrist and to the elbow. He was started on ampicillin/sulbactam and clindamycin for presumed necrotizing fasciitis. The surgical service performed a very limited debridement,which was partially limited by his coagulopathy from liver disease. The initial tissue culture was positive only for Enterococcus faecium. At the time of the consultation, his temperature was 95' F (35 degrees C), pulse 82 bpm, respirations 16 BPM, and blood pressure 101/56 mmHg. He was awake but not oriented or responsive. His cardiopulmonary exam was unremarkable. Abdominal exam disclosed ascites. His extremities were all grossly edematous with multiple ecchymoses. His left forearm had a circumferential area of ecchymosis and necrosis with macerated margins, sparing only the lateral ulnar epicondyle, and involving deeper structures of subcutaneous fat and muscle(Figures 1-2 showing evolution of the lesion in a period of 1 week). Small tissue clippings were taken from the edge of the lesion and placed on culture plates. By the next morning, the patient's tissue culture grew a mold, later identified as Rhizopus. Amphotericin B was initiated. Surgical intervention (wide debridement with potential conversion to amputation of the left arm) was considered to offer little benefit in view of the patient's multiple and severe comorbidities and his poor prognosis. Amphotericin B was then stopped; the patient died within a week from his multiple medical complications. The family refused an autopsy.
Systemic arterial vasodilatation has been implicated in the pathogenesis of sodium retention in cirrhosis. Hydrophobic bile acids, which have vasodilatory actions, may be involved. Ursodeoxycholic acid, a hydrophilic bile acid, could potentially decrease systemic arterial vasodilatation, possibly due to its antioxidant effects, and improve sodium handling in cirrhosis. The effects of ursodeoxycholic acid on systemic, renal and forearm haemodynamics, liver function and renal sodium handling were assessed in vasodilated cirrhotic patients with refractory ascites treated with a transjugular intrahepatic porto-systemic shunt (TIPS). Eight cirrhotic patients with refractory ascites without TIPS placement served as controls for the sodium handling effects of ursodeoxycholic acid. From 1 month post TIPS, seven patients were studied before, after 1 month of treatment with ursodeoxycholic acid (15 mg.day-1.kg-1) and at 1 month follow-up. Lipid peroxidation products were used as indices of its antioxidant effects. Ursodeoxycholic acid caused a significant reduction in sodium excretion in both groups (P<0.05). This, in the post-TIPS patients (urinary sodium excretion: 35+/-8 mmol/day at 1 month versus 93+/-21 mmol/day at baseline, P<0.05), was due to a significant increase in sodium reabsorption proximal to the distal tubule (P<0.05), without any significant changes in systemic, renal or forearm haemodynamics, or in liver function. No significant change in lipid peroxidation products was observed. We conclude that: (i) in cirrhotic patients with refractory ascites, ursodeoxycholic acid causes sodium retention, (ii) the abnormality in sodium handling in the post-TIPS cirrhotic patients appears to be the result of a direct effect on the proximal nephron, suggesting that factors other than systemic vasodilatation also contribute to sodium retention in cirrhosis, (iii) caution should be exercised in administering ursodeoxycholic acid in cirrhotic patients with ascites.
The effects of the acute administration of arterial vasoconstrictors on renal plasma flow (RPF) and urinary sodium excretion (UNaV) in cirrhotic patients with ascites with or without hepatorenal syndrome (HRS) are still controversial. As a consequence, vasoconstrictors are not actually used in the treatment of renal sodium retention or HRS in these patients, regardless of the several lines of evidence suggesting that these renal functional abnormalities are related to a marked arterial vasodilation. The lack of an orally available effective arterial vasoconstrictor probably represents a further reason for this omission. Consequently, the present study was made to evaluate the acute effects of the oral administration of midodrine, an orally available -mimetic drug, on systemic and renal hemodynamics and on UNaV in cirrhotic patients with ascites. Mean arterial pressure (MAP), heart rate (HR), cardiac index (CI), systemic vascular resistance (SVR), left forearm blood flow (LFBF), left leg blood flow (LLBF), RPF, glomerular filtration rate (GFR), UNaV, plasma renin activity (PRA), plasma concentration of antidiuretic hormone (ADH), and the serum levels of nitrite and nitrate (NOx) were evaluated in 25 cirrhotic patients with ascites (17 without HRS and 8 with type 2 HRS) before and during the 6 hours following the oral administration of 15 mg of midodrine. During the first 3 hours after the drug administration, a significant increase in MAP (89.6 +/- 1.7 vs. 81.80 +/- 1.3 mm Hg; P < .0001) and SVR (1, 313.9 +/- 44.4 vs. 1,121.2 +/- 60.1 dyn . sec . cm-5; P < .0001) accompanied by a decrease in HR (69 +/- 2 vs. 77 +/- 3 bpm; P < .005) and CI (2,932.7 +/- 131.4 vs. 3,152.5 +/- 131.4 mL . min-1 . m2 BSA; P < .0025) was observed in patients without HRS. No change was observed in LFBF and LLBF. The improvement in systemic hemodynamics, which was also maintained during the the 3- to 6-hour period after midodrine administration, was accompanied by a significant increase in RPF (541.5 +/- 43.1 vs. 385.7 +/- 39.9 mL . min-1; P < .005), GFR (93.1 +/- 6.5 vs. 77.0 +/- 6.7 mL . min-1; P < .025), and UNaV (92.7 +/- 16.4 vs. 72.2 +/- 10.7 microEq . min-1; P < .025). In addition, a decrease in PRA (5.33 +/- 1.47 vs. 7.74 +/- 2.17 ng . mL-1 . h; P < .05), ADH (1.4 +/- 0.2 vs. 1.7 +/- 0.2 pg . mL-1; P < .05), and NOx (33.4 +/- 5.0 vs. 49.3 +/- 7.3 micromol-1; P < .05) was found. In patients with HRS, the effects of the drug on the systemic hemodynamics was smaller and shorter. Accordingly, regardless of a significant decrease in PRA (15.87 +/- 3.70 vs. 20.70 +/- 4.82 ng . mL-1 . h; P < .0025) in patients with HRS, no significant improvement was observed in RPF, GFR, or UNaV. In conclusion, the acute oral administration of midodrine is associated with a significant improvement in systemic hemodynamics in nonazotemic cirrhotic patients with ascites. As a result, renal perfusion and UNaV also improve in these patients. By contrast, midodrine only slightly improves systemic hemodynamics in patients with type 2 HRS, with no effect on renal hemodynamics and renal function.
As our contributors to this section have pointed out, there are at present two main methods of reconstructing defects of the pharynx and cervical esophagus: free jejunal transfer (FJT) and tubed radial forearm flap. The advantage of the FJT is that it is a tube, thus limiting the enteric suture lines to proximal and distal. The radial forearm flap requires not only the proximal and distal suture lines but a long longitudinal suture line to create the tube. This increase the possibility for fistula formation. The controversy surrounding this case concerns what to do with a remaining mucosal strip after a subtotal laryngectomy. Traditional reconstructive principles would dictate that normal tissue should not be sacrificed, but some would argue that the remaining mucosa should be sacrificed to allow for use of a FJT. The other alternative would be use of a radical forearm skin flap tubed to 270 degrees. At the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, we preferentially use the FJT for almost all defects and would probably have sacrificed the remaining mucosal strip in this particular case. We have used skin flaps to patch pharyngeal defects and prevent stricture in a number of cases. This is usually done however when the remaining pharyngeal mucosa approaches 50% or greater. Although we do not routinely use the tubed radial forearm flap because of the increased rate of fistula formation, there are some definite indications for its use. The first important indication is in patients in whom speech rehabilitation is desired or indicated. The skin flap provides a stiffer resonating chamber for the speech production and does not have the peristalsis or the mucus production associated with the jejunal flap. Another indication for use of radial forearm flap would be when there is a contraindication to celiotomy, ie, patients with hepatic cirrhosis and associated ascites or other abdominal conditions precluding abdominal exploration. In this situation, avoiding an intra-abdominal procedure would limit operative morbidity. In conclusion, one should use whichever procedure obtains a healed wound and re-establishes continuity of the upper gastrointestinal tract. In our hands, retention of the remaining mucosal segment would not be critical in this particular case and in fact would present a hindrance to use of the FJT.
Endogenous alpha-atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) in plasma is elevated in various hypervolaemic conditions. Possible relationships between circulating immunoreactive ANP and cardiovascular and splanchnic haemodynamics were therefore studied in patients with cirrhosis (n = 16) and controls (n = 12). Arterial plasma concentration of ANP in supine patients was (mean +/- SEM) 33 +/- 4 vs 41 +/- 10 pg/ml (9.9 +/- 1.2 vs 12.3 +/- 3.0 fmol/l) in controls (n.s.), and there was a weak direct correlation with right atrial pressure (r = 0.36, P = 0.05). There was no relationship with the presence of ascites or diuretic treatment. Central blood volume (CBV, i.e. the blood volume in the heart cavities, lungs, and aorta), determined from the mean transit time of 125I-labelled of 125I-labelled albumin and cardiac output, was significantly reduced in cirrhotics compared to controls (1.45 +/- 0.12 vs. 1.83 +/- 0.10 l, P less than 0.02) and inversely correlated with portal pressure (r = 0.42, P less than 0.05), whereas total plasma volume was somewhat increased (3.51 +/- 0.2 vs. 3.19 +/- 0.2, 0.05 less than P less than 0.1). A high arterio-venous extraction of ANP was found in the splanchnic system (extraction ratio 0.44 vs 0.28), kidney (0.45 vs 0.54), lower limb (0.53 vs 0.40), and forearm (0.27 vs 0.18) in patients and controls, respectively (n.s.). Our results suggest that the lack of elevation of circulating ANP in cirrhosis, even in the presence of actual fluid retention, may be explained by central hypovolaemia in these patients. Turnover and degradation of ANP is rapid and normal, as evaluated from the tissue extraction ratios.
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis is a heterogeneous and curable disease of the gastrointestinal tract. The diagnosis is rare, with an approximate incidence of 1/100 000. The pathophysiology is based on infiltration of the eosinophils involving various parts of gastrointestinal system, but also different layers of the wall. The authors present a case of the eosinophilic gastroenteritis, which is characterised by the predominant subserosal type associated with asthma, ascites and bilateral pleural effusion. In patients with asthma and abdominal symptomatology, eosinophilic gastroenteritis should be considered as a possible diagnosis. These two atopic conditions may occur more frequently than generally expected, especially in the presence of protein-losing gastroenteropathy. ▸ Consider a diagnosis of eosinophilic gastroenteritis in patients with atopy and gastrointestinal symptoms. ▸ Histological demonstration of the gastrointestinal tract and/or ascites. ▸ Exclude other causes of eosinophilia such as parasites, Churg-Strauss syndrome, hypereosinophilic syndrome.
The greater omentum of the cats is said to have a lace-like structure. However, there are only a few descriptions on whether pores exist, and there are not many morphological studies on this meshwork. In this study, the greater omentum of the cats was observed at each age of development using a scanning electron microscope. The greater omentum of the cats immediately after birth was found to be continuous, and no pores were observed. Also, development of microvilli was observed in the mesothelial cells on the surface of the greater omentum. In young cats at 3 months of age, small pores were sporadically observed, and at the ages of 6-12 months, there were more and larger pores. It was estimated that the pores on the greater omentum are formed in the process of moving from the movement of organs, such as the stomach, intestines and diaphragm, and the presence of these pores enables the passage of ascites between the omental bursa, the greater omentum and the serosal cavity of the wall without flowing through the omental foramen.
Malignant peritoneal mesthelioma is a rare tumor arising from the mesothelial cells of this serosal membrane. The authors report a case of a female patient referred to our hospital for ascites of unknown etiology. As all the exams requested were negative, the patient underwent a diagnostic laparoscopy with biopsies of multiple peritoneal nodules. Histologic examination confirmed the diagnosis of malignant peritoneal mesothelioma. A cytoreductive surgery in combination with hypertermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy was performed. After four months of the procedure the patient remains asymptomatic.
Mesotheliomas are aggressive and lethal neoplasms arising from mesothelial cells lining the pleura, peritoneum, tunica vaginalis testis and pericardium. Malignant peritoneal mesothelioma accounts for about 30% of all mesotheliomas. Asbestos is the main known cause of the disease. Presenting symptoms in these patients include: ascites, abdominal pain, asthenia, weight loss, anorexia, abdominal mass, fever, diarrhea and vomiting. Electron microscopy, immunohistochemistry, computed tomography scan, echotomography, magnetic resonance imaging, positron emission tomography and laparoscopy are used in diagnosis and follow-up. Chemotherapy alone is considered as a palliative treatment for these patients who are not eligible for radical surgery. The most promising non-surgical approach today in the management of peritoneal mesothelioma is the use of the combination chemotherapy regime of an antifolate (pemetrexed and raltitrexed) and a platinum based (cisplatin) agent with a median survival of about 12-14 months. Due to peritoneal confinement of malignant mesothelioma and low occurrence of metastasis, a locoregional approach consisting of cytoreductive surgery and perioperative intraperitoneal chemotherapy has been introduced as a curative treatment option over the last decade with an overall 5-year survival rate of 29-63%. In this locoregional approach, surgery can separate the adhesions and remove the bulky tumor, leaving microscopic residual tumors much more susceptible to the killing effect of chemotherapeutic drugs. Here in St. George hospital, cytoreductive surgery and hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (using cisplatin and doxorubicin) resulted in significant survival advantage. This article describes how the prognosis of the disease has changed over the last decade.
Epithelial ovarian carcinoma (EOC) is a deadly disease, and little is known about the mechanisms underlying its metastatic progression. Using human specimens and established cell lines, we determined that the G-protein-coupled seven-transmembrane fractalkine receptor (CX(3)CR1) is expressed in primary and metastatic ovarian carcinoma cells. Ovarian carcinoma cells robustly migrated toward CX(3)CL1, a specific ligand of CX(3)CR1, in a CX(3)CR1-dependent manner. Silencing of CX(3)CR1 reduced migration toward human ovarian carcinoma ascites fluid by approximately 70%. Importantly, adhesion of ovarian carcinoma cells to human peritoneal mesothelial cells was dependent on CX(3)CL1/CX(3)CR1 signaling. In addition, CX(3)CL1 was able to induce cellular proliferation. Together, our data suggest that the fractalkine network may function as a major contributor to the progression of EOC, and further attention to its role in the metastasis of this deadly malignancy is warranted.
An 84 year-old gentleman presented with abdominal distension, anorexia and occasional epigastric pain over a four-week period. Blood parameters revealed a hypochromic microcytic anaemia. Both CT and US scan identified ascites and a mass in the left upper quadrant. An ascitic tap was performed identifying bloody ascites and the presence of reactive mesothelial cells on cytology. A subsequent laparotomy and splenectomy was performed. Histology of the resected spleen revealed a Grade 2 follicular lymphoma (Figure 2). The patient had an uneventful postoperative recovery and was well at 6 months follow up. The spleen is an organ with an important immunological function. Primary splenic involvement occurs in less than 1% of non-hodgkin's lymphoma. Symptoms of primary splenic lymphoma (PSL) include pyrexia, weight-loss, night sweats, generalised weakness and left upper quadrant pain secondary to spleno - megaly. Ascites is a rare presenting feature of PSL. This report illustrates a case of primary splenic lymphoma which poses diagnostic challenges for the pathologist and clinician and ultimately requires definitive splenectomy to confirm a diagnosis.Figure 2Photograph of histology slide displaying the lymphoma at 10× magnification.
To differentiate reactive mesothelial cells (RMs) from metastatic carcinoma and malignant mesothelioma (MM) in effusion cytology is crucial for the cytologic diagnosis and the management of the patients. In the present study, the immunocytochemical staining profile of the epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), the insulin-like growth factor-II mRNA-binding protein 3 (IMP3), and the glucose transporter-1 (GLUT-1) was examined to distinguish RMs from malignant cells. A total of 171 pleural (n = 87) and peritoneal (n = 84) effusion specimens, including 50 benign effusions with RMs, 11 MM effusions, and 110 metastatic malignant effusions, were evaluated for immunocytochemistry. EMA, IMP3, monoclonal GLUT-1, and polyclonal GLUT-1 immunoreactivity were observed in 26.0%, 6.0%, 20.0%, and 18.0% of RMs, respectively. In contrast to RMs, the immunoreactivity in MM was 100%, 36.4%, 100%, and 90.9%; adenocarcinoma (AC) was 100%, 80.8%, 81.7%, and 72.1%; squamous-cell carcinoma was 83.3%, 83.3%, 83.3%, and 66.7%. EMA, IMP3, mGLUT-1, and pGLUT-1 expressions were observed in 98.4%, 65.6%, 88.5%, and 75.4% in the pleural effusion with malignant cells, and 100%, 88.3%, 78.3%, and 71.7% in ascites containing malignant cells, respectively. The findings of the present study indicate that the immunocytochemical staining for EMA, IMP3, and GLUT-1 is a useful diagnostic tool for distinguishing effusions containing malignant cells from those that contain benign cells, and in particular, we suggest that the combination of mGLUT-1 and EMA, and IMP3 and EMA are extremely useful in pleural effusion and in ascites, respectively.
Floating gastric adenocarcinoma cells in ascitic fluid are the main cause of peritoneal dissemination. Activation of apoptosis is an important mechanism by which tumor cells are eliminated by the immune surveillance system. Hence, we examined caspase-9 expression and the apoptosis in gastric adenocarcinoma cells in ascitic fluid using immunohistochemistry, real-time polymerase chain reaction and in situ cell death detection kits, flow cytometry. The results revealed strong expression of caspase-9 in 58.49% (31/53) malignant cells and a relatively weak expression of caspase-9 in 41.51% (22/53) malignant cells. The proportion of apoptotic cells in 31 malignant cases with strong caspase-9 expression (35.14 ± 3.42)% was significantly higher than that in 22 malignant cases with relatively weak caspase-9 expression (17.29 ± 7.62)% or in mesothelial cells (10.76 ± 4.21%; p < 0.05). Kaplan-Meier survival curves demonstrated that the patients with low caspase-9 expression showed significantly shorter survival (p < 0.05) than those with high caspase-9 expression. These findings suggest that immune clearance gastric carcinoma cells in ascites activated by caspase-9 helped to improve the prognosis of patients with gastric cancer.
Primary splenic mucinous cystadenocarcinoma (MCCa) is extremely rare, and only six cases appear to have been reported previously. We present herein a case of primary splenic MCCa resulting in pseudomyxoma peritonei (PMP). A 66-year-old Japanese woman presented to a hospital with a chief complaint of upper abdominal pain and a 7-year history of splenic cyst. Cyst rupture was noted on computed tomography, and splenectomy was performed. The abdominal cavity was filled with a large amount of gelatinous ascites, with the appearance of PMP. On the cut surface, multiple cysts containing mucinous material were found within and outside the spleen. Microscopically, splenic parenchyma was occupied by large mucinous pools focally lined with mucinous epithelial cells and mesothelial cell-like cells, which were considered benign. Outside the spleen, a low-grade MCCa component was found. No ectopic pancreatic or intestinal tissue was identified. Although most PMP cases are known to be caused by low-grade mucinous appendiceal tumor, the present case represents the first report of a splenic MCCa resulting in PMP.
A third of patients with epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) present ascites. The cellular fraction of ascites often consists of EOC cells, lymphocytes, and mesothelial cells, whereas the acellular fraction contains cytokines and angiogenic factors. Clinically, the presence of ascites correlates with intraperitoneal and retroperitoneal tumor spread. We have used OV-90, a tumorigenic EOC cell line derived from the malignant ascites of a chemonaive ovarian cancer patient, as a model to assess the effect of ascites on migration potential using an in vitro wound-healing assay. A recent report of an invasion assay described the effect of ascites on the invasion potential of the OV-90 cell line. Ascites sampled from 31 ovarian cancer patients were tested and compared with either 5% fetal bovine serum or no serum for their nonstimulatory or stimulatory effect on the migration potential of the OV-90 cell line. A supervised analysis of data generated by the Affymetrix HG-U133A GeneChip identified differentially expressed genes from OV-90 cells exposed to ascites that had either a nonstimulatory or a stimulatory effect on migration. Ten genes (IRS2, CTSD, NRAS, MLXIP, HMGCR, LAMP1, ETS2, NID1, SMARCD1, and CD44) were upregulated in OV-90 cells exposed to ascites, allowing a nonstimulatory effect on cell migration. These findings were validated by quantitative polymerase chain reaction. In addition, the gene expression of IRS2 and MLXIP each correlated with prognosis when their expression was assessed in an independent set of primary cultures established from ovarian ascites. This study revealed novel candidates that may play a role in ovarian cancer cell migration.
The peritoneal mesothelioma is a rare pathology with unspecific symptoms reason to be a difficult diagnosis. We report a case of a 58 year old man with diabetes mellitus type 2, arterial hypertension and smoking; without precedent of asbestos exposure. The patient presented a one month history characterized by progressive increase of the abdominal volume and sensation of fullness; three weeks later they added breathlessness and hyporexia. The patient was in regular general condition; he was not presenting hepatic stigmas, edema or adenomegalies. The examination of thorax and cardiovascular it was normal. The abdomen distended by ascites, not painful, liver and spleen not examined. Laboratory: Hemoglobin 11,9 gr/dl, WBC 6840/mm3 Bands 1 %, lymphocytes 10 %, platelets 620000/mm3, PT 12 seconds, PTT 34 seconds, glucose 158 mg/dl, BUN 20,5 mg/ dl, creatinine 1,2 mg/dl, proteins 6,1 gr/dl, albumin 2,6 gr/dl. LDH 316 U/l, beta2microglobulin 2,2 mg/l (0.83-1.15 mg/l). HBV and HCV negative. Ca 19.9, CEA, AFP and PSA negative. Hemocultive negative. Ascitic fluid: ADA 20,3 U/l, serum-ascitic albumin gradient (SAAG) 1,1. Leukocytes 2237 cells/mm3, PMN 6 %, lymphocytes 90 %, mesothelial cells 4 %, proteins 4,6 gr/dl, albumin 2,34 gr/dl, glucose 44 mg/dl, LDH 1918 U/l. Gram and cultive: negatives. BAAR and cultive: negative . Cytology: mesothelial cells with changes of type reagent, Block cell for tumour cells: negative. Abdominal US: increased peritoneum and abundant ascitic fluid. Thoracic-abdominal CT: left side pleural effusion, severe ascites with thick epyplon. Upper GI endoscopy: moderate gastritis. Colonoscopy: two small sessile polyps in sigmoid colon. The finds of the laparoscopy were interpreted like carcinomatosis or peritoneal tuberculosis. The report of the peritoneal biopsy was informed as suggestive of undifferentiated carcinoma; the reappraisal with inmunohystochemic (calretinin +,cytokeratin +, vimentin +) indicated malignant peritoneal mesothelioma, type epithelial. The evolution was torpid. The patient was transferred to the Service of Oncology where they initiated chemotherapy with Cysplatin (CDDP) and died 20 days later. The malignant mesothelioma peritoneal is a unfrequent entity, with limited therapeutic options; generally detected late, with a palliative treatment.
Effusions, especially peritoneal, are seen in less than 2% of patients with renal cell carcinoma (RCC). Since the tumor cells in RCC are bland and nondescript, the involvement of serous effusions is difficult to diagnose. An accurate recognition of malignant effusion and differentiation from reactive mesothelial cells is imperative. A 55-year-old male presented with gradually progressive ascites. Cytospin preparations from ascitic fluid showed reactive mesothelial cells admixed with few smooth-contoured clusters of cells with moderate cytoplasm, vesicular nuclei with prominent nucleolus. He had undergone nephrectomy for papillary RCC two years earlier. Another 36-year-old man underwent left nephrectomy for suspected RCC. Intra-operative ascitic fluid was sent for cytologic examination and showed numerous reactive mesothelial cells along with few clusters of cells with scant to moderate amount of cytoplasm, vesicular nucleus and a small nucleolus. Considering the histomorphology of the primary renal tumor in both cases, a cytologic diagnosis of malignant peritoneal effusion, morphologically compatible with RCC was rendered. RCC, due to its bland cytologic features, is easily overlooked in effusions. In a known patient, the cytopathologist must be extra vigilant to pick up the few cell clusters present in the fluid preparations and differentiate them from reactive mesothelial cells. A close inspection of the cytologic features and comparison with the histopathology of the primary tumor helps in making an accurate diagnosis.
Kallikrein-related peptidase 7 (KLK7) is upregulated in epithelial ovarian carcinoma (EOC) with high levels correlated with poor prognosis. However, the mechanisms underlying this relationship and the role of KLK7 in EOC progression are unknown. We report that two different KLK7 transcripts, KLK7-253 and KLK7-181, are simultaneously expressed in high-grade serous EOC. Multicellular aggregates (MCA), which promote cell survival and chemoresistance, were observed in SKOV-3 cells stably overexpressing KLK7-253 in particular. Importantly, these MCAs invade into a monolayer of mesothelial cells and form cancer cell foci. Blocking MCA using antibodies against KLK7 and alpha(5)beta(1) and beta(1) integrins confirmed the involvement of KLK7 and integrin-regulated cell adhesion. Increased levels of alpha(5)/beta(1) integrins and enhanced attachment to fibronectin and vitronectin, which was blocked with an anti-beta(1) integrin antibody, were also observed. Finally, Western blot and immunohistochemistry showed higher KLK7 and alpha(5)/beta(1) integrin levels in serous EOC cells from ascites and tumor samples from chemotherapy nonresponders with short postsurvival times. Additionally, both KLK7-253 and KLK7-181 clones were more resistant to paclitaxel treatment in vitro. These findings suggest a mechanism for the association of high KLK7 levels with chemoresistance and poor prognosis for serous EOC patients by promotion of peritoneal dissemination and reinvasion via increased MCA and alpha(5)beta(1) integrin-dependent cell adhesion.
Lymphatic stomata are small openings of lymphatic capillaries on the free surface of the mesothelium. The peritoneal cavity, pleural cavity, and pericardial cavity are connected with lymphatic system via these small openings, which have the function of active absorption. The ultrastructure of the lymphatic stomata and their absorption from the body cavities are important clinically, such as ascites elimination, neoplasm metastasis, and inflammatory reaction. The lymphatic stomata play an important role in the physiological and pathological conditions. Our previous study indicated for the first time that nitric oxide (NO) could regulate the opening and absorption of the lymphatic stomata. It could decrease the level of free intracellular calcium [Ca(2+)] through increasing the cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) level in the rat peritoneal mesothelial cells, thus regulating the lymphatic stomata. This process is related with the NO-cGMP-[Ca(2+)] signal pathway. In this review, we summarize the recent advances in understanding the development and the function of the lymphatic stomata. The ultrastructure and regulations of the lymphatic stomata are also discussed in this review.
Cell suspension of a human breast cancer cell line (Hattori line) was injected intraperitoneally into an athymic nude mouse to produce ascites form breast cancer (peritoneal carcinomatosis). Subsequent serail transfers of cancer cells in ascites were also successful in mice. All male and female nude mice injected 1 X 10(7) tumor cells died of accumulation of ascites after a latency period averaging 4 weeks, with one exception which died of a wasting disease. Multiple lung metastases were observed in some mice. The tumor cells retained cytological characteristics of the original cell line, and histology of the infiltrating tumor in the peritoneum and omentum was that of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Differentiation not only toward acinar or duct lining cells but also toward myoepithelial cells was observed by histochemistry, immunohistochemistry, and electron microscopy.
The present work is a prospective, observational, hospital based study on 100 sero positive cases of dengue infection, admitted to Dhaka Children Hospital, Dhaka, Bangladesh during the period 2000 -2001. The patients were in the age group 8 months to 14 years with a mean age of 8.3 years. The serological tests were performed by rapid strip test. Primary dengue infection (only Ig M positive) was observed in 15% cases while rest 85% were secondary dengue infection (either Ig G or both Ig M and Ig G positive). Classical dengue fever (DF) was noted in 11% patients and 89% children presented with dengue hemorrhagic fever / dengue shock syndrome (DHF / DSS). Common clinical presentations were fever, headache, retro- orbital pain, arthralgia / bone pain, vomiting, abdominal pain and bleeding manifestations. Other presentations were tachycardia, bradycardia, hypotension, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, pleural effusion, ascites, thrombocytopenia and high hematocrit values. The incidences of tachycardia, hypotension, hepatomegaly, high hematocrit and thrombocytopenia were significantly higher in DHF / DSS cases. The tourniquet test was positive in significantly higher percentage of DF cases. The tourniquet test and thrombocytopenia did not correlate well with other bleeding manifestations suggesting alternate pathogenesis for bleeding. In an epidemic setting, if a child presents with fever, vomiting, musculoskeletal pain and bleeding along with hepatomegaly, low platelet count and high hematocrit, a strong possibility of DHF/ DSS should be kept.
The clinical and biochemical profile of dengue haemorrhagic fever (DHF) varies from epidemic to epidemic. We studied children hospitalized with DHF from September 2003 to December 2003. All were diagnosed, managed and monitored according to a standard protocol. Of the 34 who fulfilled the World Health Organization criteria of DHF, 22 (64.6%) were male. All patients presented with fever and hepatomegaly. Examination also revealed splenomegaly in 11 (32.4%), ascites in 6 (17.6%) and pleural effusion in 3 (8.8%). Common bleeding manifestations were positive tourniquet test in 22 (64.7%) and epistaxis in eight (23.5%). Most children had a platelet count of between 20,000/mm(3) and 50,000/mm(3) (56%). Bleeding manifestations were not related to platelet count (P > 0.05). Serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase (SGPT) >40 IU/L was seen in 22 (64.6%) patients, alkaline phosphate (ALP) >400 IU/L in 12 (35.3%) and serum bilirubin >1 mg% in 3 (8.8%). IgM dengue serology was positive in 68.5% cases. There was no significant difference in liver function tests with age or sex (P > 0.05). Clinical features of DHF varied from the previous epidemic. Hepatic dysfunction with increased levels of serum enzymes was common in DHF.
During the months of September 1993 through February 1994, an outbreak of hemorrhagic fever occurred in the city of Jayapura, the provincial capital of Irian Jaya, Indonesia. Seventy-two patients (age range = 1-41 years) with suspected dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) were enrolled into the outbreak investigation conducted during October-November 1993. The pediatric patient population consisted of 36 individuals ages 1-12 years of age with a similar male to female ratio. From clinical histories obtained from the children diagnosed with DHF (n = 23), the predominant complaints were fever (100%), headache (96.7%), vomiting (47.8%), abdominal pain (39.1%), back/bone pain (39.1%), cough (39.1%), sore throat (21.7%), convulsions (17.4%), and eye pain (13.0%). Clinical findings of the same pediatric patients included a positive tourniquet test result (100%), thrombocytopenia (100%), hemoconcentration (100%), skin petechiae (43.5%), epistaxis (39.1%), and maculopapular rash (26%). All four of the children diagnosed with DHF grade IV had hepatomegaly, pleural effusion, ascites, cold perspiration, and confusion. Serologic data demonstrated that a majority (46 of 70, 68.7%) of the individuals assessed did not have significant levels of IgM specific for dengue viruses at the time of their admission. However, the nine successful dengue virus isolations were only from these serononreactive cases (19.6%). From the other patients assessed, 11.4% had a primary (or first exposure) serologic response to dengue virus antigen (predominantly IgM); 17.1% had a secondary (or subsequent exposure) serologic response to the same dengue antigens (predominantly IgG response) and 5.7% (four adults) had indeterminate serologic data that could not differentiate between reactivity to dengue or Japanese encephalitis virus antigen preparations. Virus culture of blood samples produced nine dengue virus isolates: DEN- 1 (2), DEN-2 (1), and DEN-3 (6). Japanese encephalitis and influenza viruses were not isolated from blood and pharyngeal specimens, respectively, from any of the patients. Thus, this first reported outbreak of DHF in Irian Jaya, Indonesia was found to be attributed to dengue viruses types 1, 2, and 3.
A case of severe coagulopathy after peritoneovenous shunting for intractable ascites and hepatorenal syndrome in a cirrhotic patient is reported. It was controlled and solved without removal of the shunt, using a vascular tourniquet which allowed a regulation of the ascitic flow. The method seems susceptible of improvement and could be routinely used in risk patients.
Monoclonal antibodies (McAbs) to human bladder carcinoma were generated by fusion of NS-1 mouse myeloma cells with spleen cells from BALB/c mice immunized with either cultured human bladder cancer cells or cells obtained from a fresh surgically removed bladder tumor. Four hybridomas which reacted strongly with bladder tumor cells and not to normal skin fibroblasts or urothelial cells were identified and cloned by limiting dilution to obtain monoclonality. One McAb, 3G2-C6, raised with cultured tumor bladder cells MGH-U1 (EJ) as the immunogen reacted more strongly to the bladder tumor lines tested than any of the other McAbs resulting from various fusion experiments. Hybridoma 3G2-C6 was found to secrete murine immunoglobulin G1 and to produce high titer ascites fluid when grown in BALB/c mice. Results from quantitative enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays on a panel of more than 35 cell lines demonstrated that McAb 3G2-C6 reacted with several bladder tumor cell lines 50 to 90 times more than with normal transitional urothelium. Two kidney and two testicular tumor lines also bound 10 times more 3G2-C6 than with normal cells. The 3G2-C6 antigen was only marginally detected on a number of other cancer and noncancerous cells tested such as breast and lung tumor cells, melanoma, fetal cells, and peripheral blood lymphocytes. To identify the antigen 125I-labeled membrane components from MGH-U1 cells were extracted with detergent, immunoprecipitated with Protein-A bound 3G2-C6, and analyzed by sodium dodecyl sulfate-gel electrophoresis. This revealed that McAb 3G2-C6 binds to a Mr 90,000 cell surface component. Indirect immunofluorescence microscopy with fluorescein isothiocyanate-anti-mouse immunoglobulin G also identified the antigen on the surface of cultured and fresh tumor cells and detected the antigen on 16 of 17 Grade 3 bladder tumor specimens as well as on some kidney and testicular tumor cells. This study confirms the potential of the hybridoma technique for producing McAbs capable of identifying tumor associated antigens which may be useful in the diagnosis and treatment of bladder cancer.
Fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) is an endocrine hormone that is secreted by bone and acts on the kidney and parathyroid glands to regulate phosphate homeostasis. The effects of FGF23 on phosphate homeostasis are mediated by binding to FGF receptors and their coreceptor, αklotho, which are abundantly expressed in the kidney and parathyroid glands. However, the mechanisms of how FGF23 regulates phosphate handling in the proximal tubule are unclear because αklotho is primarily expressed in the distal nephron in humans and rodents. The purpose of this study was to gain additional insight into the FGF23-αklotho system by investigating the spatial and temporal aspects of the expression of fgf23 and αklotho in the zebrafish, Danio rerio. Here, we report that zebrafish fgf23 begins to be expressed after organogenesis and is continually expressed into adulthood in the corpuscles of Stannius, which are endocrine glands that lie in close proximity to the nephron and are thought to contribute to calcium and phosphate homeostasis in fish. Zebrafish αklotho expression can be detected by 24-h postfertilization in the brain, pancreas and the distal pronephros, and by 56-h postfertilization in liver. Expression in the distal pronephros persists throughout development, and by Day 5, there is also strong expression in the proximal pronephros. αklotho continues to be expressed in the tubules of the metanephros of the adult kidney. These data indicate conservation of the FGF23-αklotho system across species and suggest a likely role for αklotho in the proximal and distal tubules.
Aromatase is essential for estrogen production and is the target of aromatase inhibitors, the most effective endocrine treatment for postmenopausal breast cancer. Peripheral tissues in women, including the breast, express aromatase via alternative promoters. Female mice lack the promoters that drive aromatase expression in peripheral tissues; thus, we generated a transgenic humanized aromatase (Arom(hum)) mouse line containing a single copy of the human aromatase gene to study the link between aromatase expression in mammary adipose tissue and breast pathology. Arom(hum) mice expressed human aromatase, driven by the proximal human promoters II and I.3 and the distal promoter I.4, in breast adipose fibroblasts and myoepithelial cells. Estrogen levels in the breast tissue of Arom(hum) mice were higher than in wild-type mice, whereas circulating levels were similar. Arom(hum) mice exhibited accelerated mammary duct elongation at puberty and an increased incidence of lobuloalveolar breast hyperplasia associated with increased signal transducer and activator of transcription-5 phosphorylation at 24 and 64 wk. Hyperplastic epithelial cells showed remarkably increased proliferative activity. Thus, we demonstrated that the human aromatase gene can be expressed via its native promoters in a wide variety of mouse tissues and in a distribution pattern nearly identical to that of humans. Locally increased tissue levels, but not circulating levels, of estrogen appeared to exert hyperplastic effects on the mammary gland. This novel mouse model will be valuable for developing tissue-specific aromatase inhibition strategies.
To identify cell populations directly responsive to prolactin (PRL), GH, erythropoietin, or granulocyte-colony stimulating factor within the physiological setting of an intact mammal, we combined in situ detection of hormone-activated signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)-5 in rats with high-throughput tissue array analysis using cutting-edge matrix assembly (CEMA). Inducible activation of Stat5a/b, as judged by levels of nuclear-localized, phosphoTyr694/699-Stat5a/b, served as an immediate and sensitive in situ marker of receptor signaling in rat tissues after injection into male and female rats of a single, receptor-saturating dose of hormone for maximal receptor activation. CEMA tissue arrays facilitated analysis of most tissues, including architecturally complex, thin-walled, and stratified tissues such as gut and skin. In 40 tissues analyzed, 35 PRL-responsive and 32 GH-responsive cell types were detected, of which 22 cell types were responsive to both hormones. Interestingly, PRL but not GH activated Stat5 in nearly all of the endocrine glands. In mammary glands, PRL activated Stat5 in a majority of luminal epithelial cells but not myoepithelial cells, stromal fibroblasts, or adipocytes, whereas GH activated Stat5 in a significant fraction of myoepithelial cells, fibroblasts, and adipocytes but only in a minority of luminal cells. Finally, the organism-wide screening revealed a yet-to-be identified erythropoietin-responsive cell type in connective tissue. CEMA tissue arrays provide cost-effective in situ analysis of large numbers of tissues. Biomarker-based identification of cell populations responsive to individual hormones may shed new light on endocrine disease as well as improve understanding of effects and side effects of hormones and drugs.
Hormone concentrations decline with aging. Up to now it was not clear, whether the decrease of hormone concentrations in blood samples are also present in cutaneous suction blister fluids, and whether skin from different anatomical sites shows different hormone concentrations.Analysis of suction blister fluids and paired blood samples from young (mean 27.8 y) and old (mean 62.6 y) male subjects by UPLC-MS/MS showed that DHEA concentration in blood samples was age-dependently significantly reduced, but increased in suction blister fluids, while androstenedione behaved in an opposite manner to DHEA. Testosterone decreased age-dependently in blood samples and in suction blister fluids. Regarding skin sites, DHEA was lower in samples from upper back compared with samples from the forearm. In contrast, the concentrations of androstenedione and testosterone were higher in samples from upper back.In vitro analyses showed that SZ95 sebocytes, but neither primary fibroblasts nor keratinocytes, were able to use DHEA as precursor for testosterone biosynthesis, which was confirmed by expression analysis of 3β-hydroxysteroiddehydrogenase in skin biopsies.In conclusion, we show an inverse pattern of DHEA and androstenedione concentrations in blood vs. suction blister fluids, highlighting age-dependent changes of dermal testosterone biosynthesis, and a stronger metabolism in young skin. Furthermore, sebocytes play a central role in cutaneous androgen metabolism.
Non-melanoma skin cancer is a disease primarily afflicting geriatric patients as evidenced by the fact that 80% of all non-melanoma skin cancers are diagnosed in patients over the age of 60 years. As such, geriatric skin responds to cancer-inducing UVB irradiation in a manner that allows the establishment of tumor cells. Currently, the only effective treatment for non-melanoma skin cancer is the removal of the tumors after they appear, indicating the need for a more cost-effective prophylactic therapy. Geriatric volunteers were treated with fractionated laser resurfacing therapy on either sun-protected (upper buttocks) or chronically sun-exposed (dorsal forearm) skin. Fractionated laser resurfacing therapy was shown to decrease the occurrence of senescent fibroblasts in geriatric dermis, increase the dermal expression of IGF-1, and correct the inappropriate UVB response observed in untreated geriatric skin. These responses to fractionated laser resurfacing were equal to the effects seen previously using the more aggressive wounding following dermabrasion. Furthermore, fractionated laser resurfacing was equally effective in both sun-protected and sun-exposed skin. The ability of fractionated laser resurfacing treatment to protect against the occurrence of UVB-damaged proliferating keratinocytes indicates the potential of fractionated laser resurfacing to reduce or prevent aging-associated non-melanoma skin cancer.
Vertebrate limbs develop three main proximodistal (PD) segments (upper arm, forearm, and hand) in a proximal-to-distal sequence. Despite extensive research into limb development, whether PD specification occurs through nonautonomous or autonomous mechanisms is not resolved. Heterotopic transplantation of intact and recombinant chicken limb buds identifies signals in the embryo trunk that proximalize distal limb cells to generate a complete PD axis. In these transplants, retinoic acid induces proximalization, which is counteracted by fibroblast growth factors from the distal limb bud; these related actions suggest that the first limb-bud PD regionalization results from the balance between proximal and distal signals. The plasticity of limb progenitor cell identity in response to diffusible signals provides a unifying view of PD patterning during vertebrate limb development and regeneration.
Vascular calcification (VC) is highly prevalent in CKD and leads to increased vascular stiffness and cardiovascular disease (CVD). Non-traditional cardiovascular risk factors include abnormal bone turnover and/or dysregulation of the calcification inhibitors, although their relative contribution remains unclear. We investigated the association between bone turnover, the calcification inhibitors (matrix gla protein; MGP and Fetuin-A), and the phosphate regulating hormone; fibroblast growth factor-23 (FGF-23) and arterial stiffness in pre-dialysis CKD patients. One hundred and forty-five patients with CKD stages 1-4 (74 M, 71 F) aged (mean [SD]) 53 [14] years were studied. Bone turnover markers (bone-specific alkaline phosphatase (BALP) and tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRACP)) and MGP, Fetuin-A and FGF-23 were determined. BMD was measured at the lumbar spine (LS), femoral neck (FN), forearm (FARM) and total hip (TH). Arterial stiffness was assessed by contour analysis of digital volume pulse (SI(DVP)). There was a significant positive correlation between TRACP:BALP ratio and SI(DVP) ( r=0.19, p=0.023). Following multi-linear regression analysis, significant associations were seen between serum BALP (p=0.037), TRACP (p=0.009) and TRACP:BALP ratio (p=0.001) and SI(DVP) independently of traditional CVD risk factors. No significant relationship between SI(DVP) and MGP, Fetuin-A and FGF-23 was observed. A significant negative correlation was seen between BMD at the FARM and SI(DVP) in CKD stage 4 (r=-0.35, p=0.024). The association remained significant following correction for age, gender and cardiovascular risk factors (p=0.029). Our data suggest a link between imbalances in bone turnover and arterial stiffness in pre-dialysis CKD. Longitudinal studies are needed to evaluate the clinical usefulness of these bone turnover markers as predictors of CVD in CKD.
Studies in animals show that fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-23 interferes with vascular reactivity induced by the nitric oxide (NO) system. To investigate the relationship between circulating FGF-23 levels and the response of forearm blood flow to ischemia (flow-mediated vasodilatation, FMD) and nitroglycerin, we tested 183 patients with stage 3-4 chronic kidney disease (CKD). None of them had cardiovascular complications or were taking drugs interfering with vascular function. Patients with FGF-23 levels above the median had significantly lower glomerular filtration rate, FMD, and fetuin-A levels (an anti-inflammatory molecule and potent inhibitor of calcification). They also had higher proteinuria and phosphate levels when compared to patients whose FGF-23 levels were below the median. The response to nitroglycerin was not different between the two groups. Multiple regression analysis showed that the relationship between FGF-23 and FMD was only modestly sensitive to adjustment for classical risk factors, biomarkers of bone mineral metabolism, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein, and homeostatic model assessment index. Adjustment for asymmetrical dimethyl arginine (ADMA) weakened the strength of this link; however, it remained highly significant. There was no independent association between FGF-23 and nitroglycerin. Thus, attenuation of FMD by ADMA suggests that this endogenous inhibitor of NO synthase may, in part, mediate the vascular effects of FGF-23 in patients with CKD.
We previously detected strong evidence for linkage of forearm bone mineral density (BMD) to chromosome 4p (lod=4.3) in a set of 29 large Mexican American families. Fibroblast growth factor binding protein 1 (FGFBP1) is a strong candidate gene for bone homeostasis in this region. We sequenced the coding region of FGFBP1 in a subset of our Mexican American study population and performed association studies with BMD on SNPs genotyped in the entire cohort. We then attempted to replicate these findings in an independent study cohort and performed in vitro functional studies on replicated, potentially functional polymorphisms using a luciferase reporter construct to evaluate influence on gene expression. Several SNPs spanning the gene, all in one large block of linkage disequilibrium, were significantly associated with BMD at various skeletal sites (n=872, p=0.001-0.04). The associations were then replicated in an independent population of European ancestry (n=972; p=0.02-0.04). Sex-stratified association analyses in both study populations suggest this association is much stronger in men. Subsequent luciferase reporter gene assays revealed marked differences in FGFBP1 expression among the three common haplotypes. Further experiments revealed that a promoter polymorphism, rs12503796, results in decreased expression of FGFBP1 and inhibits upregulation of the gene by testosterone in vitro. Collectively, these findings suggest that sequence variation in FGFBP1 may contribute to variation in BMD, possibly influencing osteoporosis risk.
The radial forearm free flap has been popular in many areas of reconstructive surgery. Despite the many attributes of this flap in maxillofacial reconstruction, one of the disadvantages has been the morbidity of the donor site. Allogeneic cultured epidermis has been successfully applied on large second degree burns and on chronic leg ulcers. Autologous human keratinocytes and fibroblast equivalents can be cultured in-vitro from a small skin sample in order to produce a sufficient amount of epithelial autografts to cover the large defects of third-degree burn wounds. Interestingly, transplanted cultured epidermis retains characteristics of the original donor site. We report a case of a patient who underwent skin replacement by cultured epithelial autograft after wound breakdown occurred in the forearm donor site during the early postoperative period. This method could represent an auspicious alternative to conventional grafting methods for forearm free flap reconstruction. To the best of our knowledge, skin replacement by cultured epithelial autografts in this region has not been extensively described in the literature.
The oxidative effects of cigarette smoke on the human skin were investigated. A remarkable increase in the conversion ratio of squalene (SQ) to squalene monohydroperoxide (SQHPO) due to exposure to cigarette smoke was observed using a CL-HPLC (high performance liquid chromatography with a chemiluminescence detector) system. The results showed that cigarette smoke caused lipid peroxidation. We also found that the addition of chain-breaking-type antioxidants, such as oolong tea extract, inhibited the peroxidation. When cultured human skin fibroblasts were exposed to cigarette smoke, this increased the intensity of ultraweak chemiluminescence (CL), leading us to assume that cigarette smoke caused oxidation in cultured human skin fibroblasts. When the cultured human skin fibroblasts were treated with antioxidants such as glutathione, thiotaurine, hypotaurine and ascorbic acid there was little increase in CL, meaning that oxidation had been prevented in the human skin fibroblasts. We also exposed the human forearm to cigarette smoke and obtained sebum using cotton immersed in acetone in order to measure hydroperoxide levels by means of a CL-HPLC system. The exposure of skin to the smoke caused a dose-dependent increase in hydroperoxides derived from cigarette smoke. Further exposure of the forearm to cigarette smoke increased the intensity of CL, but pretreating the skin with antioxidants such as glutathione, thiotaurine and hypotaurine inhibited this increase. From these results, we concluded that cigarette smoke had an oxidative effect on SQ, cultured human skin fibroblasts and the surface of the human skin. The application of antioxidants prevented the cigarette smoke-induced oxidation. We consider that these oxidative effects on the skin could be a cause of skin disorders and skin aging.
We report on a family with LEOPARD syndrome which was molecularly proven (p.Thr468Met in PTPN11) in a father and his adult son. The father had multiple lentigines dispersed equally over his body; the son was similarly affected except for the left part of thorax, back and left arm, which were completely devoid of lentigines and only showed a few nevi. In addition, the son was found to have a mosaic karyotype, 47,XYY/46,XY, in lymphocytes. Skin biopsies from the pigmented and unpigmented forearm showed that mainly a 47,XYY karyotype was present in the pigmented skin and mainly a 46,XY karyotype in the unpigmented skin. In both fibroblast cultures the PTPN11 mutation was present, and no additional mutation could be detected. We discuss the various possible explanations for this phenotype, which include the possibility of coincidence; revertant mosaicism; silencing of a second PTPN11 mutation; gene(s) located on a sex chromosome influencing the phenotype; and epigenetic influences. We favor that the co-occurrence of a sex chromosome mosaicism and mosaicism for skin symptoms in a single patient with LEOPARD syndrome is coincidence, but that mosaicism for LEOPARD skin symptoms in itself may well be more frequent and needs additional studies. Each of the above-hypothesized mechanisms may then remain possible.
The plexiform fibrohistiocytic tumor is rare. It affects mainly children and adolescent. This tumor occurs at the dermo-subcutaneous region of the upper extremities. We report a case of a 11 year-old child exhibited a nodule on his forearm who is diagnosed as a plexiform fibrohistiocytic tumor. Histologically, it was a plexiform proliferation of spindle fibroblast-like cells associated with mononuclear histiocyte-like cells. Treatement consisted on a large excision and in the follow-up there is no recurrence of the tumor. 'I'he differential diagnosis may be difficult with other tumors in to the derm or sub-cutaneus adipose tissu, having a plexiform pattern or a predominantly fibroblastic pattern like the fibromatosis and well differenciated fibrosarcoma. This tumor reccured in 20 to 30 % of the cases. Lymph node and pulmonary metastasis are rare. This clinical behaviour leads authors to class it into a "borderline tumor".
Type I collagen is the primary component of the skin dermis. Both the quantity and quality of extracellular collagen are primarily related to skin ageing. In this study, we investigated the possibility that Camellia japonica oil (CJ oil) may be introduced as an anit-wrinkle agent. As a first step to this end, human COL1A2 promoter luciferase assay was performed in human dermal fibroblast cells. CJ oil was determined to activate human COL1A2 promoter in a concentration-dependent manner. In consistency with this result, while matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1 activity was inhibited by CJ oil, human type I procollagen synthesis was also induced by CJ oil. These results suggest the possibility that CJ oil may be involved in the skin ageing. For the evaluation of CJ oil's safety and efficiency on human skin, human skin primary irritation test and trans-epidermal water loss (TEWL) were performed. Transepidermal water loss (TEWL) was measured before treatment then, 1h and 2h after treatment; the forearm site was selected to measure TEWL. Also, a human skin primary irritation test was performed on the normal skin (upper back) in 30 volunteers to see if a certain material included in CJ oil has irritation or sensitization potential. In these assays, CJ oil reduced trans-epidermal water loss (TEWL) and did not induce any adverse reactions. Therefore, based on these results, we suggest the possibility that CJ oil may be considered as possible wrinkle-reducing candidates for topical application.
Non-insulin-dependent diabetes (NIDDM) is a major cause of premature morbidity and mortality among adults. Macrovascular disease of coronary and peripheral vessels is the primary cause of death in these patients. Numerous experimental and epidemiologic studies have suggested that hyperinsulinemia accelerates the development of atherosclerosis. In experimental models, insulin promotes diet-induced lesion development and overrides lesion regression and estrogen protection against atherosclerosis. Local hyperinsulinemia induced by selected arterial infusion accelerates atherosclerosis in the perfused artery. Insulin has been shown to stimulate subintimal smooth muscle and fibroblast cells in culture, and to increase the uptake and local synthesis of lipid by these cells. Insulin may also induce inhibition of fibrinolysis. Several prospective studies performed on nondiabetic patients show that either fasting or postprandial insulin levels are a sensitive predictor of the development of coronary disease independent of other risk factors. Two recent studies in NIDDM patients confirm this finding and suggest that glycemic control may not be a significant factor in the development of macrovascular disease. Diseases of carbohydrate tolerance, ie, NIDDM, impaired glucose tolerance, obesity, are frequently associated with elevated circulating insulin levels, either physiologically or secondary to treatment. Given the high prevalence of cardiovascular disease in these populations, modifying therapy to minimize hyperinsulinemia should be an important consideration in a treatment program. Use of oral agents such as glipizide or gliclazide, which induce less diurnal hyperinsulinemia, may be advantageous when compared to traditional oral agent or insulin therapy.
In view of the potential menace of a terrorism attack with smallpox virus, an intensive search of chemotherapeutic agents active against orthopoxviruses is underway. We comparatively studied the antiviral activity of cidofovir (CDV) and idoxuridine (IUdR) against two vaccinia virus (VV) strains, Bratislava and RIIPD, in cell cultures of chick embryo fibroblasts (CEF). The investigations were carried out according to cytopathic effect (CPE) inhibition assay protocols. To determine the cytotoxicity of the compounds, maximal tolerated concentration (MTC) was calculated in CEF cell monolayers and 50% cell growth inhibitory concentration (CGIC50) was calculated in growing cell cultures. It was found that the antiviral effects were strongly dependent on virus inoculum size. There were no marked differences in the susceptibility to CDV and IUdR between the two VV strains. The individual half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) for CDV varied from 7.1-8.5 microM at 10/100 virus 50% infectious dose (ID50) to 13.6-26.5 microM at 10,000 ID50. The CDV selectivity index was also virus dose-dependent with MTC/IC50 and CGIC50/IC50 values ranging between 37.8-141.4 and 33.3-124.6, respectively. For IUdR, IC50 ranged from 0.58 to 0.85 microM, but the selectivity index for monolayer CEF and growing cell cultures produced substantial different results with MTC/IC50 and CGIC50/IC50 values between 117.7-172.4 and 20.4-33.3, respectively. The combination effects of CDV and IUdR against VV Bratislava strain in the CPE inhibition test were also determined. The test design of both combination antiviral effect and combined cytotoxicity followed a three-dimensional model. The combined effect of CDV and IUdR on VV replication in monolayer CEF cultures was characterized as a markedly synergistic one. In contrast, CDV and IUdR together reduced cytotoxicity in both monolayer and growing CEF cells.
The epicardium forms an epithelial layer on the surface of the heart. It is derived from a cluster of mesothelial cells, which is termed the proepicardium. The proepicardium gives rise not only to the epicardium but also to epicardium-derived cells. These cells populate the myocardial wall and differentiate into smooth muscle cells, fibroblast, and possibly endothelial cells. In this review, the formation of the proepicardium is discussed. Marker genes, suitable to identify these cells in the embryo and in the adult, are introduced. Recent evidence suggests that the PE is made up of distinct cell populations. These cell lineages can be distinguished on the basis of marker gene expression and differ in their differentiation potential. The role of the epicardium as a resource for cardiac stem cells and its importance in cardiac regeneration is also discussed.
Peritoneal dissemination is the most frequent metastatic pattern of scirrhous gastric cancer. However, despite extensive research effort, disease outcomes have not improved sufficiently. Tumor progression and metastasis result from interactions between cancer and various cells in the stroma, including endothelial cells, immune cells and fibroblasts. Fibroblasts have been particularly well studied; they are known to change into carcinoma-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and produce transforming growth factor β (TGF-β), which mediates cancer-stroma interactions. Here, we investigated whether TGF-β derived from cancer cells in the peritoneal microenvironment activates human peritoneal mesothelial cells (HPMCs), leading to the progression and fibrosis of gastric cancer. We found that activated HPMCs (a-HPMCs) took on a spindle shape formation, decreased the expression of E-cadherin and increased that of α-SMA. Furthermore, a-HPMCs became more invasive and upregulated proliferation of human gastric cancer-derived MKN45 cells following direct cell-cell contact. Notably, MKN45 cells co-cultured with a-HPMCs also acquired anchorage-independent cell growth and decreased expression of E-cadherin in vitro. To measure the effects of the co-culture in vivo, we developed a mouse xenograft model into which different culture products were subcutaneously injected. The largest tumors were observed in mice that had been given MKN45 cells co-cultured with a-HPMCs. Furthermore, these tumors contained HPMC-derived fibrous tissue. Thus, the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of HPMCs appears to drive peritoneal dissemination and tumor fibrosis.
The oral antidiabetic agent metformin has anticancer properties, probably via adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase activation. In the present study, growth inhibition was assessed by a clonogenic and by a cell survival assay, apoptosis induction was assessed by Hoechst staining and caspase activities and cell cycle alteration after exposure to metformin, and the interaction of metformin with cisplatin in vitro were elucidated in four human lung cancer cell lines representing squamous, adeno-, large cell and small cell carcinoma. Clonogenicity and cell proliferation were inhibited by metformin in all the cell lines examined. This inhibitory effect was not specific to cancer cells because it was also observed in a non-transformed human mesothelial cell line and in mouse fibroblast cell lines. Inhibition of clonogenicity was observed only when the cells were exposed to metformin for a long period, (10 days) and the surviving fraction, obtained after inhibiting proliferation by increasing the dose, reached a plateau at approximately 0.1-0.3, indicating the cytostatic characteristics of metformin. Metformin induced significant apoptosis only in the small cell carcinoma cell line. A tendency of cell cycle accumulation at the G0/G1 phase was observed in all four cell lines. Cisplatin, in a dose-dependent manner, severely antagonized the growth inhibitory effect of metformin, and even reversed the effect in three cell lines but not in the adenocarcinoma cell line. The present data obtained using various histological types of human lung cancer cell lines in vitro illustrate the cytostatic nature of metformin and its cytoprotective properties against cisplatin.
We investigate the mechanism of talc pleurodesis (TP) in 20 patients with recurrent malignant pleural effusion and 10 patients with nonmalignant pleural effusions. We measured IL-8 levels before and 6 h after TP and find a significant threefold increase (2.26 ng/mL ± 0.7 to 6.5 ng/mL 0.1), which explains the recruitment of inflammatory cells in these patients. We hypothesize that TP is enable by stimulating the mesothelial cells (MS) to secrete FGF. A significant tenfold increase in FGF-b (0.05 ng/mL ± 0.02 to 0.44 ng/mL 0.6) was seen 24 h after talc instillation (P < 0.04). In order to examine whether FGF-b is secreted by MS cells, MS recovered from CHF patients with recurrent pleural effusions were cultured for 48 h in the presence or absence of increasing concentrations of talc (from 100 ng/mL to 1 mg/mL). They produced significant levels of FGF-b in a dose dependent manner (P < 0.005). We hypothesized that a successful pleurodesis involves an early enhanced recruitment of inflammatory cells through a rise of IL-8 followed by enrollment of fibroblasts from the submesothelial space through increased mesothelial FGF-b production.
Hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) are recognized as a major player in liver fibrogenesis. Upon liver injury, HSCs differentiate into myofibroblasts and participate in progression of fibrosis and cirrhosis. Additional cell types such as resident liver fibroblasts/myofibroblasts or bone marrow cells are also known to generate myofibroblasts. One of the major obstacles to understanding the mechanism of liver fibrogenesis is the lack of knowledge regarding the developmental origin of HSCs and other liver mesenchymal cells. Recent cell lineage analyses demonstrate that HSCs are derived from mesoderm during liver development. MesP1-expressing mesoderm gives rise to the septum transversum mesenchyme before liver formation and then to the liver mesothelium and mesenchymal cells, including HSCs and perivascular mesenchymal cells around the veins during liver development. During the growth of embryonic liver, the mesothelium, consisting of mesothelial cells and submesothelial cells, migrates inward from the liver surface and gives rise to HSCs and perivascular mesenchymal cells, including portal fibroblasts, smooth muscle cells around the portal vein, and fibroblasts around the central vein. Cell lineage analyses indicate that mesothelial cells are HSC progenitor cells capable of differentiating into HSCs and other liver mesenchymal cells during liver development.
Pleurodesis aims to obliterate the pleural space by producing extensive adhesion of the visceral and parietal pleura, in order to control relapse of either pleural effusions (mostly malignant) or pneumothorax. A tight and complete apposition between the two pleural layers is a necessary condition to obtain a successful pleurodesis, but--besides this mechanical aspect--there are many biological mechanisms that appear to be common to most of the sclerosing agents currently used. Following intrapleural application of the sclerosing agent, diffuse inflammation, pleural coagulation-fibrinolysis imbalance (favoring the formation of fibrin adhesions), recruitment and subsequent proliferation of fibroblasts, and collagen production are findings in the pleural space. The pleural mesothelial lining is the primary target for the sclerosant and plays a pivotal role in the whole pleurodesis process, including the release of several mediators like interleukin-8, transforming growth factor-β and basic fibroblast growth factor. When the tumor burden is high, normal mesothelial cells are scarce, and consequently the response to the sclerosing agent is decreased, leading to failure of pleurodesis. Also, the type of tumor in the pleural cavity may also affect the outcome of pleurodesis (diffuse malignant mesothelioma and metastatic lung carcinomas have a poorer response). There is general agreement that talc obtains the best results, and there are also preliminary experimental studies suggesting that it can induce apoptosis in tumor cells and inhibit angiogenesis, thus contributing to a better control of the malignant pleural effusion. There is concern about complications (possibly associated with talc but other agents as well) related to systemic inflammation and possible activation of the coagulation cascade. In order to prevent extrapleural talc dissemination, large-particle talc is recommended. Although it could--to some degree--interfere with the mechanisms leading to pleurodesis and a carefully balanced clinical decision has therefore to be made, prophylactic treatment with subcutaneous heparin is recommended during hospitalization (immediately before and after the pleurodesis procedure).
Long-term peritoneal dialysis induces peritoneal fibrosis with submesothelial fibrotic tissue. Although angiogenesis and inflammatory mediators are involved in peritoneal fibrosis, precise molecular mechanisms are undefined. To study this, we used microarray analysis and compared gene expression profiles of the peritoneum in control and chlorhexidine gluconate (CG)-induced peritoneal fibrosis mice. One of the 43 highly upregulated genes was pleiotrophin, a midkine family member, the expression of which was also upregulated by the solution used to treat mice by peritoneal dialysis. This growth factor was found in fibroblasts and mesothelial cells within the underlying submesothelial compact zones of mice, and in human peritoneal biopsy samples and peritoneal dialysate effluent. Recombinant pleiotrophin stimulated mitogenesis and migration of mouse mesothelial cells in culture. We found that in wild-type mice, CG treatment increased peritoneal permeability (measured by equilibration), increased mRNA expression of TGF-β1, connective tissue growth factor and fibronectin, TNF-α and IL-1β expression, and resulted in infiltration of CD3-positive T cells, and caused a high number of Ki-67-positive proliferating cells. All of these parameters were decreased in peritoneal tissues of CG-treated pleiotrophin-knockout mice. Thus, an upregulation of pleiotrophin appears to play a role in fibrosis and inflammation during peritoneal injury.
During peritoneal dialysis (PD), mesothelial cells undergo mesothelial-to-mesenchymal transition (MMT), a process associated with peritoneal-membrane dysfunction. Because TGF-β1 can induce MMT, we evaluated the efficacy of TGF-β1-blocking peptides in modulating MMT and ameliorating peritoneal damage in a mouse model of PD. Exposure of the peritoneum to PD fluid induced fibrosis, angiogenesis, functional impairment, and the accumulation of fibroblasts. In addition to expressing fibroblast-specific protein-1 (FSP-1), some fibroblasts co-expressed cytokeratin, indicating their mesothelial origin. These intermediate-phenotype (Cyto(+)/FSP-1(+)) fibroblasts had features of myofibroblasts with fibrogenic capacity. PD fluid treatment triggered the appearance of CD31(+)/FSP-1(+) and CD45(+)/FSP-1(+) cells, suggesting that fibroblasts also originate from endothelial cells and from cells recruited from bone marrow. Administration of blocking peptides significantly ameliorated fibrosis and angiogenesis, improved peritoneal function, and reduced the number of FSP-1(+) cells, especially in the Cyto(+)/FSP-1(+) subpopulation. Conversely, overexpression of TGF-β1 in the peritoneum by adenovirus-mediated gene transfer led to a marked accumulation of fibroblasts, most of which derived from the mesothelium. Taken together, these results demonstrate that TGF-β1 drives the peritoneal deterioration induced by dialysis fluid and highlights a role of TGF-β1-mediated MMT in the pathophysiology of peritoneal-membrane dysfunction.
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is characterised by myofibroblast proliferation leading to architectural destruction. Neither the origin nor the continued proliferation of myofibroblasts is well understood. Explanted human IPF lungs were stained by immunohistochemistry for calretinin, a marker of pleural mesothelial cells (PMCs). Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and cystic fibrosis (CF) lungs acted as controls. The number of PMCs per 100 nucleated cells and per photomicrograph was estimated along with the Ashcroft score of fibrosis. Mouse PMCs expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP) or labelled with nanoparticles were injected into the pleural space of mice given intranasal transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1. Mouse lungs were lavaged and examined for the presence of GFP, smooth muscle α-actin (α-SMA) and calretinin. Calretinin-positive PMCs were found throughout IPF lungs, but not in COPD or CF lungs. The number of PMCs correlated with the Ashcroft score. In mice, nanoparticle-laden PMCs were recoverable by bronchoalveolar lavage, depending on the TGF-β1 dose. Fluorescent staining showed α-SMA expression in GFP-expressing PMCs, with co-localisation of GFP and α-SMA. PMCs can traffic through the lung and show myofibroblast phenotypic markers. PMCs are present in IPF lungs, and their number correlates with IPF severity. Since IPF presumably begins subpleurally, PMCs could play a pathogenetic role via mesothelial-mesenchymal transition.
Purpose. To investigate the expression, localization, and physiologic function of renin-angiotensin system (RAS) components in the mouse lacrimal gland. Methods. Lacrimal glands and cultured lacrimal gland fibroblasts from wild-type (WT) BALB/c (H-2(d)) mice were used. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and immunohistochemistry were used to determine the expression and localization of the RAS components, prorenin/renin, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), angiotensin II, angiotensin II type 1 receptor (AT1R), and angiotensin II type 2 receptor (AT2R) in the normal mouse lacrimal gland. To examine the change in tear secretion, mice received ARB (AT1R blocker) or AT2R antagonist. Tear secretion was assessed by cotton thread test before and after drug administration. Results. The mRNAs coding for angiotensinogen, prorenin, ACE, and both AT1R and AT2R were found in normal lacrimal gland tissue and cultured lacrimal gland fibroblasts. Prorenin/renin and ACE were identified in myoepithelial cells around ducts and acini and in blood vessels. Angiotensin II, AT1R, and AT2R were observed in the ducts and interstitial fibroblasts. AT1R and AT2R were also localized in blood vessels. All the cultured lacrimal gland fibroblasts expressed angiotensin II, AT1R, and AT2R. Tear secretion increased in mice that received ARB. Conclusions. The results are consistent with the hypothesis that a tissue-specific RAS is present in the lacrimal gland, and suggest that fibroblasts are one of the cell types playing a role in the tissue RAS. Tissue RAS might be involved in tissue function of regulating tear secretion in the lacrimal gland.
Loss of caveolin-1 (Cav-1) expression in breast cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) is predictive of poor prognosis in breast cancer, but its function has not been established. Our study tested the hypotheses that loss of Cav-1 expression in breast fibroblasts was associated with poor prognosis in breast cancer, through promotion of breast cancer cell invasion. Cav-1 stromal expression was immunohistochemically assessed in 358 breast cancers. Cav-1 expression in primary breast fibroblasts was analysed by western blot. Modified Boyden chamber assays determined fibroblast ability to promote invasion of breast cancer cells. The impact of siRNA silencing of Cav-1 in fibroblasts was evaluated using invasion assays and 3D co-culture assays. Loss of Cav-1 expression in breast stroma was significantly associated with decreased breast cancer-specific and disease-free survival (p = 0.01). Mean survival was 72 months (Cav-1(+) group) versus 29.5 months (Cav-1(-) group). This was confirmed in multivariate analysis. Cav-1 expression was significantly decreased in CAFs compared to normal fibroblasts (p = 0.01) and was associated with increased invasion-promoting capacity. Cav-1 siRNA-treated fibroblasts promoted significantly increased invasion of MDA-MB-468 and T47D breast cancer cells from 27% (control) to 67% (p = 0.006) and from 37% to 56%, respectively (p = 0.01). 3D co-cultures of MDA-MB-468 cells with myoepithelial cells led to the formation of organized cohesive structures when cultured with conditioned media from fibroblasts but resulted in a disorganized appearance in the presence of conditioned media from Cav-1 siRNA-treated fibroblasts, accompanied by loss of E-cadherin expression in tumour cells. Our data confirm that loss of stromal Cav-1 in breast cancer predicts poor outcome. At a functional level, Cav-1-deficient CAFs are capable of significantly increasing the invasive capacity of breast cancer cells. Copyright © 2012 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
We have developed 3D coculture models, which we term MAME (mammary architecture and microenvironment engineering), and used them for live-cell imaging in real-time of cell:cell interactions. Our overall goal was to develop models that recapitulate the architecture of preinvasive breast lesions to study their progression to an invasive phenotype. Specifically, we developed models to analyze interactions among pre-malignant breast epithelial cell variants and other cell types of the tumor microenvironment that have been implicated in enhancing or reducing the progression of preinvasive breast epithelial cells to invasive ductal carcinomas. Other cell types studied to date are myoepithelial cells, fibroblasts, macrophages and blood and lymphatic microvascular endothelial cells. In addition to the MAME models, which are designed to recapitulate the cellular interactions within the breast during cancer progression, we have developed comparable models for the progression of prostate cancers. Here we illustrate the procedures for establishing the 3D cocultures along with the use of live-cell imaging and a functional proteolysis assay to follow the transition of cocultures of breast ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) cells and fibroblasts to an invasive phenotype over time, in this case over twenty-three days in culture. The MAME cocultures consist of multiple layers. Fibroblasts are embedded in the bottom layer of type I collagen. On that is placed a layer of reconstituted basement membrane (rBM) on which DCIS cells are seeded. A final top layer of 2% rBM is included and replenished with every change of media. To image proteolysis associated with the progression to an invasive phenotype, we use dye-quenched (DQ) fluorescent matrix proteins (DQ-collagen I mixed with the layer of collagen I and DQ-collagen IV mixed with the middle layer of rBM) and observe live cultures using confocal microscopy. Optical sections are captured, processed and reconstructed in 3D with Volocity visualization software. Over the course of 23 days in MAME cocultures, the DCIS cells proliferate and coalesce into large invasive structures. Fibroblasts migrate and become incorporated into these invasive structures. Fluorescent proteolytic fragments of the collagens are found in association with the surface of DCIS structures, intracellularly, and also dispersed throughout the surrounding matrix. Drugs that target proteolytic, chemokine/cytokine and kinase pathways or modifications in the cellular composition of the cocultures can reduce the invasiveness, suggesting that MAME models can be used as preclinical screens for novel therapeutic approaches.
A 70-year-old woman developed a malignant mixed tumor of the soft tissue 2 years after total knee arthroplasty. A 5×3×3-cm elastic hard tumor at the lateral side of the surgical scar was resected. The tumor showed focal infiltration into surrounding adipose and fibrous tissues, focal necrosis, and vascular infiltration. It was diagnosed as malignant. Mixed tumor, or myoepithelioma, of the soft tissue is a relatively rare tumor that was recently recognized as a disease entity; the vast spectrum of myoepithelial cell differentiation and the resultant morphologic diversity might increase the difficulty of the histological diagnosis. Postoperatively, the patient did not receive adjuvant therapy and no recurrence of the tumor was observed for 6 years. Range of motion of her left knee is -5° extension and 90° flexion; however, her activities of daily living are restricted because of general fatigue, partly due to hepatoma and chemotherapy.Despite the increase of artificial implant use worldwide, reports of peri-implant tumor formation are rare. Although we do not know the exact mechanism of tumor genesis, we consider the fibroblast formation in the routine healing process to be a possible mechanism. Further investigation is necessary to identify coexisting factors that increase the risk of tumor formation after implantation.
Concerted alterations between stromal fibroblasts and neoplastic cells underline the carcinogenic process. Activation of alpha-smooth muscle actin (SMA) expression, a cytoskeleton protein normally expressed only in myoepithelial cells, is considered a landmark for the activation of stromal fibroblasts with little however being known regarding the mechanism governing the expression of SMA in the stroma.
The functional role of the bladder urothelium has been the focus of much recent research. The bladder mucosa contains two significant cell types: urothelial cells that line the bladder lumen and suburothelial interstitial cells or myofibroblasts. The aims of this study were to culture these cell populations from human bladder biopsies and to perform immunocytochemical characterisation.
The canonical view of the origin of tumor lymphovascular emboli is that they usually originate from lymphovascular invasion as part of a multistep metastatic process. Recent experimental evidence has suggested that metastasis can occur earlier than previously thought and we found evidence that tumor emboli formation can result from the short-circuiting step of encircling lymphovasculogenesis. Experimentally, we used a xenograft of human inflammatory breast cancer (MARY-X), a model that exhibited florid tumor emboli, to generate tumoral spheroids in vitro. In observational studies, we chose human breast carcinoma cases where there appeared to be a possible transition of in situ carcinoma to lymphovascular emboli without intervening stromal invasion. These cases were studied by morphometry as well as IHC with tumor proliferation (Ki-67) and adhesion (E-cadherin) markers, myoepithelial (p63), as well as endothelial (podoplanin [D2-40], CD31, VEGFR-3, Prox-1) markers. Unlabelled spheroids coinjected with either GFP or RFP-human myoepithelial cells or murine embryonal fibroblasts (MEFs) gave rise to tumors which exhibited GFP/RFP immunoreactivity within the cells lining the emboli-containing lymphovascular channels. In vitro studies demonstrated that the tumoral spheroids induced endothelial differentiation of cocultured myoepithelial cells and MEFs, measured by real time PCR and immunofluorescence. In humans, the in situ clusters exhibited similar proliferation, E-cadherin immunoreactivity and size as the tumor emboli (p =.5), suggesting the possibility that the latter originated from the former. The in situclusters exhibited a loss (50%-100%) of p63 myoepithelial immunoreactivity but not E-cadherin epithelial immunoreactivity. The tumor emboli were mainly present within lymphatic channels whose dual p63/CD31, p63/D2-40 and p63/VEGFR-3 and overall weak patterns of D2-40/CD31/VEGFR-3 immunoreactivities suggested that they represented immature and newly created vasculature derived from originally myoepithelial-lined ducts. Collectively both experimental as well as observational studies suggested the possibility that these breast cancer emboli resulted from encircling lymphovasculogenesis rather than conventional lymphovascular invasion.
Skin responds to environmental stressors via coordinated actions of the local neuroimmunoendocrine system. Although some of these responses involve opioid receptors, little is known about cutaneous proenkephalin expression, its environmental regulation, and alterations in pathology. The objective of this study was to assess regulated expression of proenkephalin in normal and pathological skin and in isolated melanocytes, keratinocytes, fibroblasts, and melanoma cells. The proenkephalin gene and protein were expressed in skin and cultured cells, with significant expression in fibroblasts and keratinocytes. Mass spectroscopy confirmed Leu- and Met-enkephalin in skin. UVR, Toll-like receptor (TLR)4, and TLR2 agonists stimulated proenkephalin gene expression in melanocytes and keratinocytes in a time- and dose-dependent manner. In situ Met/Leu-enkephalin peptides were expressed in differentiating keratinocytes of the epidermis in the outer root sheath of the hair follicle, in myoepithelial cells of the eccrine gland, and in the basement membrane/basal lamina separating epithelial and mesenchymal components. Met/Leu-enkephalin expression was altered in pathological skin, increasing in psoriasis and decreasing in melanocytic tumors. Not only does human skin express proenkephalin, but this expression is upregulated by stressful stimuli and can be altered by pathological conditions.
Invasive breast cancer represents the endpoint of a developmental process that originates in the terminal duct lobular units and is believed to progress through stages of increasing proliferation, atypical hyperplasia, and carcinoma in situ before the cancer acquires invasive and metastatic capabilities. By comparison with invasive breast cancer, which has been studied extensively, the preceding stages of benign breast disease are more poorly understood. Much less is known about the molecular changes underlying benign breast disease development and progression, as well as the transition from in situ into invasive disease. Even less focus has been given to the specific role of stroma in this progression. The reasons for lack of knowledge about these lesions often come from their small size and limited sample availability. More challenges are posed by limitations of the models used to investigate the lesions preceding invasive breast cancer. However, recent studies have identified alterations in stromal cell function that may be critical for disease progression from benign disease to invasive cancer: key functions of myoepithelial cells that maintain tissue structure are lost, while tissue fibroblasts become activated to produce proteases that degrade the extracellular matrix and trigger the invasive cellular phenotype. Gene expression profiling of stromal alterations associated with disease progression has also identified key transcriptional changes that occur early in disease development. In this review, we will summarize recent studies showing how stromal factors can facilitate progression of ductal carcinoma in situ to invasive disease. We also suggest approaches to identify processes that control earlier stages of disease progression.
A small body of literature has been published reporting the application of topical oxygen for chronic non-healing wounds . Frequently, and erroneously, this form of oxygen administration has been referred to as "topical hyperbaric oxygen therapy" or even more erroneously "hyperbaric oxygen therapy." The advocates of topical oxygen claim several advantages over systemic hyperbaric oxygen including decreased cost, increased safety, decreased complications and putative physiologic effects including decreased free radical formation and more efficient delivery of oxygen to the wound surface. With topical oxygen an airtight chamber or polyethylene bag is sealed around a limb or the trunk by either a constriction/tourniquet device or by tape and high flow (usually 10 liters per minute) oxygen is introduced into the bag and over the wound. Pressures just over 1.0 atmospheres absolute (atm abs) (typically 1.004 to 1.013 atm abs) are recommended because higher pressures could decrease arterial/capillary inflow. The premise for topical oxygen, the diffusion of oxygen into the wound adequate to enhance healing, is attractive (though not proven) and its delivery is certainly less complex and expensive than hyperbaric oxygen. When discussing the physiology of topical oxygen, its proponents frequently reference studies of systemic hyperbaric oxygen suggesting that mechanisms are equally applicable to both topical and systemic high pressure oxygen delivery. In fact, however, the two are very different. To date, mechanisms of action whereby topical oxygen might be effective have not been defined or substantiated. Conversely, cellular toxicities due to extended courses of topical oxygen have been reported, although, again these data are not conclusive, and no mechanism for toxicity has been examined scientifically. Generally, collagen production and fibroblast proliferation are considered evidence of improved healing, and these are both enhanced by hyperbaric oxygen therapy. Paradoxically, claims of decreased collagen production and fibroblast inhibition in wounds subjected to topical oxygen have been reported in studies of topical oxygen as a benefit of topical oxygen therapy. The literature on topical oxygen is mostly small case series or small controlled but not randomized trials. Moreover, the studies generally are not aimed at specific ulcer types, but rather at "chronic wounds." This non-specific approach is recognized as a major design flaw in any study of therapies designed to improve impaired wound healing. The only randomized trial for topical oxygen in diabetic foot ulcers actually showed a tendency toward impaired wound healing in the topical oxygen group. Contentions that topical oxygen is superior to hyperbaric oxygen are not proven. There are potentially plausible mechanisms that support both possibly beneficial and detrimental effects of topical oxygen therapy, and thus well designed and executed basic science research and clinical trials are clearly needed. There is some ongoing research in regard to the role of topical oxygen at established wound laboratories. Neither CMS nor other third party payors recognize or reimburse for topical oxygen. Therefore, the policy of the Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society in regard to topical oxygen is stated as follows: 1. Topical oxygen should not be termed hyperbaric oxygen since doing so either intentionally or unintentionally suggests that topical oxygen treatment is equivalent or even identical to hyperbaric oxygen. Published documents reporting experience with topical oxygen should clearly state that topical oxygen not hyperbaric oxygen is being employed. 2. Mechanisms of action or clinical study results for hyperbaric oxygen cannot and should not be co-opted to support topical oxygen since hyperbaric oxygen therapy and topical oxygen have different routes and probably efficiencies of entry into the wound and their physiology and biochemistry are necessarily different. 3. The application of topical oxygen cannot be recommended outside of a clinical trial at this time based on the volume and quality of scientific supporting evidence available, nor does the Society recommend third party payor reimbursement. 4. Before topical oxygen can be recommended as therapy for non-healing wounds, its application should be subjected to the same intense scientific scrutiny to which systemic hyperbaric oxygen has been held.
To examine the role of peptide leukotrienes in tourniquet-induced renal failure, hindlimbs of rabbits were fastened for 5 h and then released for 6 h. Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) increased significantly at the 3-h release. In the fastened muscle, peptide leukotrienes LTC4, LTD4 and LTE4 increased immediately after or at the 3-h release. LTD4 and LTE4 in the blood increased at the 6-h release. The edematous destruction of renal microvessels and proximal tubule cells was observed at the 3-h release. Glomerular changes were not observed. Immunoreactions of LTC4/D4 were localized in the lysosomes of the macrophages, leukocytes and fibroblasts of the fastened muscles immediately after the release, as well as in the lysosomes of renal proximal tubular cells and on the endothelial cell surface of the renal capillary at the 3-h release. These changes continued up to the end of the release. The lipoxygenase inhibitor attenuated the BUN increase and edema manifestation in the fastened muscle. These results suggest that peptide leukotrienes derived from the fastened skeletal muscle are related to tourniquet-induced renal failure.
In a recent study (Nitz et al., Exp Neurol 94:264-279, 1986) the validity of a rat animal model to examine effects of tourniquet compression and vascular occlusion on limb motor function, leg girth, and electrophysiologic changes was established. Here we report observations on sciatic nerve morphologic and morphometric alterations of these same animals. The hindlimbs of 90 rats were compressed by a pneumatic tourniquet at clinically relevant pressures (200 to 400 mm Hg) for 1 to 3 hours, and the sciatic nerve was assessed by light and electron microscopy at 1, 3, and 6 weeks post compression. The nerves were also examined from five additional animals at each of these time intervals following arterial ligation and sciatic nerve epineurectomy (30 rats). Percentage of degenerating myelinated nerve fibers and volume fraction of mast cells and fibroblasts were quantified morphometrically. The percentage of degenerating myelinated nerve fibers after moderate to severe tourniquet compression and vascular manipulation was similar and ranged from 15% to 45%. Tourniquet compression, but not vascular occlusion, resulted in an increase of mast cells and fibroblasts and disruption of endothelial cells of endoneurial vessels. The results suggest that clinically relevant tourniquet compression causes a secondary increase in vascular permeability, intraneural edema, and subsequent prolonged tissue ischemia, resulting in nerve degeneration.
Urothelium is a special type of stratified epithelium that lines the distal portion of the urinary tract. For a long time, basal urothelial cells have been suspected to include a population of urothelial stem cells. Recent experiments identifying label-retaining cells as well as lineage tracing analyses corroborate this notion. There are striking morphological and antigenic similarities between basal or differentiated urothelial cells and the corresponding cells in some urothelial carcinomas. In this respect, basal cell-specific markers provide good candidates to identify urothelial carcinoma stem cells, e.g. specific cytokeratins (CK5, CK14, CK17) or adhesion molecules (specific integrin subspecies, CD44). Common properties of the stem cells of normal urothelium and urothelial cancer have thus emerged. Both are characterized by a remarkable plasticity and both rely on reciprocal interactions with stromal fibroblasts. However, the stem cells of individual urothelial carcinomas appear to differ considerably and may contribute to the heterogeneity of this disease. The presence, quantity, and particular biological nature of urothelial carcinoma stem cells in each case may thus carry important clinical information that might allow a rationale stratification of urothelial cancer patients for treatment in the near future. Keywords: urothelium, urothelial cancer, stem cells, epithelial-stromal interactions, cell culture models, clinical risk assessment.
The renal urothelium, the monolayered epithelium that covers the papilla, is the direct target of increased pressure during obstruction, yet most studies have mainly focused on tubules, fibroblasts, and inflammatory cells. We studied this epithelium in a unilateral ureteral obstruction mouse model and found that it was disrupted and had broken tight junctions, enlarged intercellular space, with loss of apical uroplakins, and marginal lumen desquamation. Shortly after obstruction these urothelial cells proliferated, peaking at day 2. By day 14, the renal urothelium was transformed into a multilayered barrier with newly synthesized uroplakins including the de novo induction of uroplakin II. This proliferation was found to be fibroblast growth factor (FGF) dependent. Renal urothelial cells constitutively express the FGF receptor 2, and obstruction activated the receptor by phosphorylation. Treatment with FGF receptor 2-antisense or vitamin A (an inhibitor of the MAP kinase in the FGFR2 pathway) decreased renal urothelial cell proliferation. Among known FGF receptor 2 ligands, only FGF7 was upregulated. Infusion of FGF7 into control mice caused the formation of a multilayered structure at 7 days, resembling the urothelium 14 days following obstruction. Thus, the pressure/stretching of renal monolayered urothelial cells is a very efficient trigger for proliferation, causing the formation of a bladder-like multistratified barrier with enhanced apical uroplakin plaques. Presumably, this ensures efficient barrier protection and repair.Kidney International advance online publication, 18 April 2012; doi:10.1038/ki.2012.110.
Although activating mutations of PIK3CA are frequent in urothelial carcinoma (UC), no information is available on their specific effects in urothelial cells or the basis for the observed mutation spectrum, which has a large excess of helical domain mutations. We investigated the phenotypic and signaling consequences of hotspot and UC-specific rare PIK3CA mutations in immortalized normal human urothelial cells (NHUC) and mouse fibroblasts (NIH3T3). Our results indicate that in NHUC, rare mutant forms and all three hotspot mutant forms of PIK3CA can activate the PI3K/AKT pathway. The relative frequency at which helical domain and kinase domain mutations are found in UC is related to their potency in inducing signaling downstream of AKT and to the phenotypic effects induced in this cell type (E545K>E542K>H1047R). Helical domain mutations E542K and E545K conferred a significant proliferative advantage at confluence and under conditions of nutrient depletion, and increased cellular resistance to anoikis. Both helical and kinase domain mutants induced increased NHUC cell motility and migration towards a chemoattractant, though no significant differences were found between the mutant forms. In NIH3T3 cells, the kinase domain mutant H1047R induced high levels of AKT activation, but helical domain mutants were significantly less potent and this was reflected in their relative abilities to confer anchorage-independent growth. Our findings indicate that the effects of mutant PIK3CA are both cell type- and mutation-specific. Helical domain mutations in PIK3CA may confer a selective advantage in the urothelium in vivo by overcoming normal contact-mediated inhibitory signals and allowing proliferation in nutrient-limiting conditions. Mutant forms of PIK3CA may also stimulate intraepithelial cell movement, which could contribute to spread of cells within the urothelium.Oncogene advance online publication, 19 March 2012; doi:10.1038/onc.2012.87.
Suburothelial myofibroblasts (sMF) are located underneath the urothelium in close proximity to afferent nerves. They express purinergic receptors and show calcium transients in response to ATP. Therefore they are supposed to be involved in afferent signaling of the bladder fullness. Since ATP concentration is likely to be very low during the initial filling phase, we hypothesized that sMF Ca(2+) activity is affected even at very low ATP concentrations. We investigated ATP induced modulation of spontaneous activity, intracellular calcium response and purinergic signaling in cultured sMF.
Cyclophosphamide-induced haemorrhagic cystitis (CHC) is an uncommon but well-recognised condition caused by a metabolite, acrolein, which is toxic to the urothelium. Based on similarities in the histopathology of radiation- and chemotherapy-induced haemorrhagic cystitis, benefit from hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT) has been proposed. HBOT produces an increased oxygen partial pressure diffusion gradient between the circulation and surrounding tissues, which enhances neutrophil function and fibroblast and macrophage migration into damaged hypoxic soft tissue, promoting collagen formation, fibroblast growth, angiogenesis and white-cell bacterial killing. There are only isolated case reports of HBOT for CHC, in the literature so we reviewed the New Zealand experience with HBOT in CHC.
The human fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) gene is frequently mutated in superficial urothelial cell carcinoma (UCC). To test the functional significance of FGFR3 activating mutations as a 'driver' of UCC, we targeted the expression of mutated Fgfr3 to the murine urothelium using Cre-loxP recombination driven by the uroplakin II promoter. The introduction of the Fgfr3 mutations resulted in no obvious effect on tumorigenesis up to 18 months of age. Furthermore, even when the Fgfr3 mutations were introduced together with K-Ras or β-catenin (Ctnnb1) activating mutations, no urothelial dysplasia or UCC was observed. Interestingly, however, owing to a sporadic ectopic Cre recombinase expression in the skin and lung of these mice, Fgfr3 mutation caused papilloma and promoted lung tumorigenesis in cooperation with K-Ras and β-catenin activation, respectively. These results indicate that activation of FGFR3 can cooperate with other mutations to drive tumorigenesis in a context-dependent manner, and support the hypothesis that activation of FGFR3 signaling contributes to human cancer.
We investigated the etiology and molecular mechanisms of bladder outlet obstruction (BOO). Transgenic (Tg) male mice overexpressing aromatase (Cyp19a1) under the ubiquitin C promoter in the estrogen-susceptible C57Bl/6J genetic background (AROM+/6J) developed inguinal hernia by 2 months and severe BOO by 9 to 10 months, with 100% penetrance. These mice gradually developed uremia, renal failure, renal retention, and finally died. The BOO bladders were threefold larger than in age-matched wild-type (WT) males and were filled with urine on necropsy. Hypotrophic smooth muscle cells formed the thin detrusor urinae muscle, and collagen III accumulation contributed to the reduced compliance of the bladder. p-AKT and ERα expression were up-regulated and Pten expression was down-regulated in the BOO bladder urothelium. Expression of only ERα in the intradetrusor fibroblasts suggests a specific role of this estrogen receptor form in urothelial proliferation. Inactivation of Pten, which in turn activated the p-AKT pathway, was strictly related to the activation of the ERα pathway in the BOO bladders. Human relevance for these findings was provided by increased expression of p-AKT, PCNA, and ERα and decreased expression of PTEN in severe human BOO samples, compared with subnormal to mild samples. These findings clarify the involvement of estrogen excess and/or imbalance of the androgen/estrogen ratio in the molecular pathogenetic mechanisms of BOO and provide a novel lead into potential treatment strategies for BOO.
Inflammatory pseudotumors are lesions characterized by proliferation of fibroblasts/myofibroblasts with variable chronic inflammatory cell infiltration. Recent studies have suggested that inflammatory pseudotumor with abundant IgG4-positive plasma cells may be a unique entity associated with systemic IgG4-related sclerosing disease and should be distinguished from other similar lesions such as inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor and fibrohistiocytic-type inflammatory pseudotumor. Localized inflammatory pseudotumor has been rarely reported in the ureter, and IgG4-associated inflammatory pseudotumor of ureter has not been described. We describe herein 3 cases of ureteral inflammatory pseudotumor of IgG4-associated lymphoplasmacytic type, focusing on density of IgG4-positive plasma cells; infiltration pattern of eosinophils and histiocytes; presence of obliterative phlebitis; and immunohistochemical profiles of smooth muscle actin, anaplastic lymphoma kinase, and CD68. Three patients, 45- and 47-year-old men and 84-year-old woman, all presented with flank pain and ureteral narrowing by a mass effect. Microscopic examination of the resected ureters showed suburothelial masslike lesions with fibroblasts/myofibroblasts without atypia, abundant plasma cells, and scattered eosinophils and histiocytes. The lesion of the 47-year-old man showed obliterative phlebitis in addition to the above findings. The lesion of the 84-year-old woman was accompanied by urothelial carcinoma in situ in the overlying urothelium. Spindle cells were diffusely or focally positive for smooth muscle actin but negative for anaplastic lymphoma kinase in all 3 cases. For each case, respectively, an average of 154, 112, and 50 plasma cells per high-power fields were immunoreactive for IgG4, a diagnostic feature of IgG4 inflammatory pseudotumor. We described 3 cases of IgG4-associated inflammatory pseudotumor of ureter with pathologic and immunohistochemical features that are compatible for lymphoplasmacytic type of inflammatory pseudotumor. Further study is needed to characterize any relationship between this entity and systemic sclerosing disease and/or urothelial carcinogenesis.
In six healthy subjects fasted overnight two different experiments were carried out on separate days and in random order: A. Oral glucose followed 60 min later by iv glipizide. B. Iv glipizide followed 60 min later by oral glucose. Each experiment was divided into two 60 min periods, and the fractionated insulin uptake by forearm tissue was calculated for each 60 min period. When the fractional insulin uptake values for these four 60 min periods were compared it was found that the uptake of insulin was significantly higher for the 60 min period that was obtained in response to glucose without glipizide pre-treatment, than it was for any of the other 60 min periods. Moreover, in some of the participants the venous insulin concentration occasionally exceeded the corresponding arterial insulin concentration after iv glipizide administration. These findings imply that glipizide may decrease insulin binding to peripheral insulin receptors in healthy individuals.
Hepatic insulin uptake was studied in five patients with portal catheters introduced through the umbilical vein remnant for diagnostic purposes. Glipizide (1,5 mg) was given intravenously followed one hour later by 20 g glucose intravenously and blood samples were drawn simultanously from the portal vein and a hepatic vein. The areas under the curves describing portal insulin and hepatic insulin were calculated. The ratio of (portal insulin area -- hepatic insulin area) /portal insulin area after glucose injection exceeded that after glipizide injection (p < 0.05). This finding indicates a greater fractional hepatic extraction of insulin after glucose than after glipizide. Healthy subjects were given 100 g glucose perorally and blood samples were drawn simultanously from a radial artery and an antecubital vein for one hour. In all cases a net insulin uptake was observed during the whole observation period. The subjects were restudied given 1.5 mg intravenously one hour before glucose administration. This time less insulin was taken up by the forearm tissues after the glucose load and in one subject insulin in venous blood samples exceeded that in corresponding arterial blood samples. It is concluded that glipizide when given before a glucose load affects the uptake of insulin by peripheral tissues during the glucose load.
A case of papillary eccrine adenoma on the right forearm of a 78-year-old Japanese woman is reported. The tumor was 1.3 cm in diameter, occupying the whole thickness of the dermis. Histologically, the tumor was composed of dilated tubules of various sizes with intraluminal papillary projections, and was surrounded by a fibrous stroma. An immunohistochemical study revealed that the proliferating tubules were composed of a single outermost layer of alpha-smooth muscle actin- and keratin 14-positive myoepithelial cells, and keratin 8-positive inner cells. This antigen expression pattern was comparable to that of the normal eccrine secretory coil, which indicates that the tumor differentiated toward the secretory coil of an eccrine sweat gland.
A number of training adaptations in skeletal muscle might be expected to enhance lactate extraction during hyperlactataemia. The aim of the present study was to determine whether resting endurance-trained forearms exhibit an increased net lactate removal during hyperlactataemia. Six racquet-sport players attended the laboratory for two experiments, separated by 2 weeks. In the first experiment incremental handgrip exercise to fatigue was performed to identify trained (TRFA, n = 6) and untrained (UTFA, n = 5) forearms. In the second experiment net forearm lactate exchange was compared between TRFA and UTFA during an incremental infusion of sodium lactate. TRFA performed more work than UTFA during handgrip exercise [mean (SE) TRFA, 66.1 (9.5) J.100 ml(-1); UTFA, 35.1 (2.3) J.100 ml(-1); P = 0.02] and UTFA exhibited a greater increase in net lactate output relative to work load (P = 0.003). During lactate infusion net lactate uptake across the resting forearms increased linearly with the arterial lactate concentration in both groups (TRFA, r = -0.95 (0.03); UTFA, r= -0.92 (0.04); P < 0.02], with no difference in the regression slopes [TRFA, -1.06 (0.13); UTFA, -1.07 (0.27); P = 0.97] or y-intercepts [TRFA, 0.67 (0.20); UTFA, 1.36 (0.67); P = 0.37] between groups. Almost all of the lactate taken up was disposed of by both groups of forearms [TRFA, 99.6 (0.2)%; UTFA, 98.5 (1.0)%; P = 0.37]. It was concluded that the net uptake and removal of lactate by resting skeletal muscle is a function of the concentration of lactate in the blood perfusing the muscle rather than the muscle training status.
Lactate has been suggested to interfere with intermediary metabolism by restricting both lipolysis and glucose utilization. To test this hypothesis, in paired studies in healthy volunteers, sodium lactate (25 mumol.min-1 x kg-1) or saline was infused for 1 h in the fasting state and during 2 h of euglycemic (4.75 mM) hyperinsulinemia (approximately 400 pmol/l). Hyperlactatemia (approximately 2 mM) had no inhibitory effect on fasting free fatty acid or glycerol levels nor did it alter the suppressive action of insulin on these substrates. Likewise, sodium lactate infusion did not influence hepatic glucose production ([3-3H]glucose technique) or its suppression by insulin. During the clamp, hyperlactatemia was associated with a small increase in whole body glucose disposal (34.9 +/- 4.1 vs. 30.3 +/- 3.7 mumol.min-1 x kg-1, P < 0.05) with no major change in the pattern of substrate (carbohydrate vs. lipid) oxidation. By simultaneously measuring arteriovenous gradients across the deep tissues of the forearm (forearm technique), it was found that hyperlactatemia did not impede insulin-mediated glucose uptake; furthermore, it could be estimated that muscle tissues were responsible for the disposal of roughly one-fifth of the lactate load. Whole body energy expenditure was stimulated above the level achieved with hyperinsulinemia when lactate was also infused. Thus, under the present experimental conditions, physiological hyperlactatemia did not interfere with lipolysis, hepatic glucose production, or whole body or forearm muscle glucose utilization, or with insulin action on these processes, and was accompanied by a strong thermogenic effect.
We studied the effect of intravenous infusion of sodium lactate (La) on muscle high-energy phosphate metabolism, pH, and venous effluent [NH3] in three patients with muscle phosphofructokinase (PFK) deficiency and three healthy subjects during maximal-effort rhythmic handgrip exercise (5 s of contraction alternated with 5 s of rest) performed for 3 min. Healthy subjects were matched to PFK-deficient patients for gender and maximal handgrip strength. Force production was recorded and during lactate infusion was matched to that without lactate. 31P-magnetic resonance spectroscopy was used to measure intracellular phosphocreatine (PCr), orthophosphate (Pi), ATP, and pH in the flexor digitorum profundus of the exercising forearm. La infusion had no effect on healthy subjects or patients during rest. In healthy subjects, La infusion had no effect on depletion of PCr; accumulation of Pi, ADP, or venous effluent NH3; or decline in pH in exercising muscle. In contrast, during exercise in PFK-deficient patients, [PCr] was higher (17.9 +/- 1.9 vs. 13.1 +/- 1.4 mmol/kg) and [phosphomonoester] (11.4 +/- 1.3 vs. 6.5 +/- 1.4 mmol/kg), [Pi] (9.2 +/- 1.8 vs. 5.0 +/- 0.7 mmol/kg), [ADP] (60.4 +/- 7.0 vs. 37.9 +/- 9.9 mumol/kg), and venous effluent [NH3] (335 +/- 136 vs. 176 +/- 61 mM) were lower (P < 0.05) during La infusion than in control conditions. The effects of La infusion on intracellular [PCr], [Pi], [phosphomonoester], [ADP], and [NH3] in PFK-deficient patients are consistent with the hypothesis that exogenous La augments the rate of oxidative phosphorylation in active muscle by bypassing the enzymatic block at PFK.
The changes in free calcium, total calcium, albumin, protein, pH, lactate, sodium, magnesium, and potassium values during and following venous stasis (3 min at an external pressure of 100 mmHg) with and without forearm exercise have been measured. The pattern of changes observed with time were dependent on the presence or absence of forearm exercise. Without exercise significant changes are only observed at 1 min following stasis and then the increases are only moderate (free calcium 2.0%, total calcium 2.4%, albumin 6.9%, and protein 5.9%). However, when the forearm is exercised, larger increases (free calcium 8.6%, total calcium 8.4%, albumin and protein 12.4%) were observed for all parameters following stasis. These increases took 1 to 3 min to return to baseline for most parameters. Only potassium and magnesium went below baseline during the recovery period. It is recommended that when a tourniquet is used to aid in obtaining venous blood samples for these analytes, exercise of the forearm be avoided. If forearm exercise is unavoidable, then the sample should be obtained 1 to 3 min after release of the tourniquet.
A 26-year-old nurse presented with a three-day history of sudden onset of pyrexia of 39 °C, malaise, and a patchy maculopapular rash, after returning from a monthlong work in Senegal. A tourniquet was applied to help locate the vein for diagnostic blood sampling. After the procedure, a petechial rash erupted with a demarcation line below the level of the tourniquet. A diagnostic test for dengue fever was performed and confirmed by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to be positive for serotype DEN-1. The tourniquet test is performed by inflating a blood pressure cuff tied on the upper arm to a point midway between systolic and diastolic blood pressure for five minutes. The test is considered positive when there are 20 or more petechiae per square inch (6.25 cm(2)) on the forearm, and is one of several clinical parameters considered by the World Health Organization to be important in the diagnosis of dengue fever.
To assess the efficacy and complications of forearm tourniquet application in minor hand and wrist surgeries those use local anesthesia.
Human motor cortex is capable of rapid and long-lasting reorganization, evident globally, as shifts in body part representations, and at the level of individual muscles as changes in corticospinal excitability. Representational shifts provide an overview of how various body parts reorganize relative to each other but do not tell us whether all muscles in a given body part reorganize in the same manner and to the same extent. Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) provides information about individual muscles and can therefore inform us about the uniformity of plastic changes within a body part. We used TMS to investigate changes in corticospinal excitability of forearm flexors and extensors after inflation of a tourniquet around the wrist. Motor evoked potential (MEP) amplitudes and input/output (I/O) curves were obtained from wrist flexors and extensors simultaneously before and during block. TMS was delivered to the optimal site for eliciting MEPs in flexors in experiment 1, extensors in experiment 2, and both flexors and extensors in experiment 3. In all experiments flexor MEP amplitude increased during block while extensor MEP amplitude showed no systematic change, and the slope of flexor but not extensor I/O curves increased. Flexor H-reflex amplitude normalized to maximal M wave showed negligible changes during block, suggesting that the increase in corticospinal excitability in the flexors cannot be completely explained by increased excitability at the spinal cord level. These findings show that forearm flexors and extensors differ in their potential for plastic changes, highlight the importance of investigating how experimentally induced plasticity affects anatomically close, but functionally distinct, muscle groups, and suggest that rehabilitation interventions aiming to alter cortical organization should consider the differential sensitivity of various muscle groups to plasticity processes.
Shear stress is the established stimulus for flow-mediated dilation (FMD). In vivo, shear stress is typically estimated using mean blood velocity. However, mean blood velocity may not adequately characterize the shear stimulus. Pulsatile flow results in large shear gradients (velocity acceleration) at the onset of flow. The purpose of this study was to determine the importance of velocity acceleration to FMD. We define FMD as the brachial artery shear rate-diameter slope. Fourteen physically active, young (26 ± 5 years), male subjects were tested. Progressive forearm heating and handgrip exercise elicited steady-state increases in shear rate. FMD was measured prior to and following induced increases in velocity acceleration. Velocity acceleration was increased by inflating a tourniquet around the forearm to 40 mm Hg. Hierarchical linear modeling was used to estimate change in diameter with repeated measures of shear stress nested within each subject. Averaged across conditions, the 40 mm Hg cuff resulted in a 14% increase in velocity acceleration (p = 0.001). FMD was attenuated by 11.0% (p = 0.015) for the acceleration vs. control condition. However, after specifying velocity acceleration as a covariate, FMD was no longer significantly (p = 0.619) different between acceleration and control conditions. This finding suggests that mean blood velocity alone may not adequately characterize the shear stimulus.
To compare standard methods (control) with a new protocol for radiocephalic fistula (RCF) creation involving ultrasound vein mapping by the surgeon in the operating room, ligation of cephalic vein branches in the lower forearm, and use of a tourniquet for the arteriovenous anastomosis.
The diameter of veins in the superficial forearm has been shown to correlate with risk for nonmaturation of newly created arteriovenous fistulas (AVFs). However, reported cut-off diameters are inconsistent. The purpose of our study was to assess the optimal diameter and distensibility of the radiocephalic vein at the wrist using the tourniquet method.
Twenty volunteers were recruited to compare a novel, silicone ring tourniquet (the Hemaclear® tourniquet) with a pneumatic tourniquet. After application of the tourniquets, the pain and paraesthesia experienced by the participants was scored at 1 minute, 5 minutes, and 10 minutes. This was repeated with the tourniquets on the forearm. On the upper arm, the silicone ring tourniquet was associated with a significantly lower pain score than the pneumatic tourniquet. The incidence of paraesthesia was also lower with the silicone ring tourniquet. When applied to the forearm, there was no statistically significant difference in pain scores between the two types of tourniquets. However the incidence of paraesthesia was again lower with the silicone ring tourniquet.
To investigate the effect of a temporary, additional mid-forearm tourniquet on the quality of intravenous regional anaesthesia.
The mucin-type glycoprotein podoplanin is specifically expressed by lymphatic but not blood vascular endothelial cells in culture and in tumor-associated lymphangiogenesis, and podoplanin deficiency results in congenital lymphedema and impaired lymphatic vascular patterning. However, research into the biological importance of podoplanin has been hampered by the lack of a generally available antibody against the human protein, and its expression in normal tissues and in human malignancies has remained unclear. We generated a human podoplanin-Fc fusion protein and found that the commercially available mouse monoclonal antibody D2-40 specifically recognized human podoplanin, as assessed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and Western blot analyses. We found that, in addition to lymphatic endothelium, podoplanin was also expressed by peritoneal mesothelial cells, osteocytes, glandular myoepithelial cells, ependymal cells, and by stromal reticular cells and follicular dendritic cells of lymphoid organs. These findings were confirmed in normal mouse tissues with anti-podoplanin antibody 8.1.1. Podoplanin was also strongly expressed by granulosa cells in normal ovarian follicles, and by ovarian dysgerminomas and granulosa cell tumors. Although podoplanin was primarily absent from normal human epidermis, its expression was strongly induced in 22 of 28 squamous cell carcinomas studied. These findings suggest a potential role of podoplanin in tumor progression, and they also identify the first commercially available antibody for the specific staining of a defined lymphatic marker in archival human tissue sections, thereby enabling more widespread studies of tumor lymphangiogenesis in human cancers.
D2-40 is an antibody that reliably detects human lymphatic endothelial cells. Because little is known about the extent to which other cells are stained, we have investigated this question in various tissues. Normal, reactive and neoplastic lymphatics (including lymphangiomas and Stewart-Treves syndrome) were stained by D2-40. Published findings indicate that some angiosarcomas and Kaposi are positive. Staining was also found in the following non-endothelial cells: mesothelial cells, follicular dendritic reticulum cells, Cajal cells, a few epithelial cells in the dermis, myoepithelial cells (e. g. breast), and basal cells (e. g. prostata), various mesenchymal cells. The following tumours were reactive: myofibroblastic tumours, gastrointestinal stromal tumour, mesothelioma, adenomatoid tumour, traumatic neuroma, seminoma, seminoma in situ and other testicular tumours, pleomorphic adenoma (one of two tumours positive), and follicular dendritic reticulum cell sarcoma. Despite this relatively broad spectrum of reactivity, we consider D2-40 to be the best commercially available antibody for the delineation of normal, reactive and neoplastic lymphatic endothelial cells.
We have characterized precisely the cytokeratin expression pattern of sweat gland myoepithelial cells and have identified conditions for propagating this cell type and modulating its differentiation in culture. Rare, unstratified epithelioid colonies were identified in cultures initiated from several specimens of full-thickness human skin. These cells divided rapidly in medium containing serum, epidermal growth factor (EGF), and hydrocortisone, and maintained a closely packed, epithelioid morphology when co-cultured with 3T3 feeder cells. Immunocytochemical and immunoblot analysis disclosed that the cells differed from keratinocytes in that they were E-cadherin-negative, vimentin-positive, and expressed an unusual set of cytokeratins, K5, K7, K14, and K17. When subcultured without feeder cells, they converted reversibly to a spindle morphology and ceased K5 and K14 expression. Under these conditions, EGF deprivation induced flattening, growth arrest, and expression of alpha-smooth muscle actin ((&agr;)-sma). Coexpression of keratins and alpha-sma is a hallmark of myoepithelial cells, a constituent of secretory glands. Immunostaining of skin sections revealed that only sweat gland myoepithelial cells expressed the same pattern of keratins and alpha-sma and lack of E-cadherin as the cell type we had cultured. Interestingly, our immunocytochemical analysis of ndk, a skin-derived cell line of uncertain identity, suggests that this line is of myoepithelial origin. Earlier immunohistochemical studies by others had found myoepithelial cells to be K7-negative. We tested five K7-specific antibodies that can recognize this protein in western blots and in the assembled keratin filaments of mesothelial cells. Three of these antibodies did not recognize the K7 present in myoepithelial cell filaments or in HeLa cell filaments, indicating that some K7 epitopes are masked when K7 pairs with K17 instead of with its usual keratin filament partner, K19.
Annexins constitute a family of Ca2+- and phospholipid-binding proteins. Although their functions are still not clearly defined, several members of the annexin family have been implicated in membrane-related events along exocytotic and endocytotic pathways. To elucidate a possible correlation of those functional proposals with the tissue distribution of annexins, we analysed immunohistochemically the expression of annexins I, II and IV in a broad variety of human tissues. Annexins I and II were chosen for this study since their functionally relevant N-terminal domains are structurally closely related, whilst annexin IV is structurally less related to the former two proteins. The study revealed distinct expression patterns of annexins I, II and IV throughout the body. Annexin I was found in leucocytes of peripheral blood, tissue macrophages and T-lymphocytes and in certain epithelial cells (respiratory and urinary system, superficial cells of non-keratinised squamous epithelium), annexin II in endothelial cells, myoepithelial cells and certain epithelial cells (mainly respiratory and urinary system), whereas annexin IV was almost exclusively found in epithelial cells. Epithelia of the upper respiratory system, Bowman's capsule, urothelial cells, mesothelial cells, peripheral nerves, the choroid plexus, ependymal cells and pia mater and arachnoid of meninges generally strongly expressed all three annexins investigated. The characteristic expression in different tissues and the intracellular distribution indicates that the three annexins investigated are involved in aspects of differentiation and/or physiological functions specific to these tissues.
In previous biochemical analyses, keratin 5 (Mr 58,000) has been detected in most mesotheliomas with epithelial component but not in pulmonary adenocarcinomas (Blobel et al., Am J Pathol 121: 235-247, 1985). In the present study, we have characterized a monoclonal antibody, AE14, as being selectively specific for keratin 5 (apart from the reactivity with certain hair proteins) as shown by immunoblotting of gel-electrophoretically separated proteins from various tissues. Immunohistochemical screening of a variety of normal human tissues, using immunoperoxidase microscopy on cryostat sections, revealed the binding of this antibody to the basal, immature cells of stratified squamous epithelia, to basal cells of pseudostratified epithelia, to some myoepithelial cells, thymic reticulum cells, certain pancreatic duct cells, as well as a variable subpopulation of mesothelial cells of the pleura and the peritoneum. In 12/13 epithelial and biphasic mesotheliomas of the pleura, heterogeneous but extended staining with antibody AE14 was seen whereas 21 pulmonary adenocarcinomas were negative or, in six of these cases, showed staining of only a few cells. Among carcinomas from other sites, colonic adenocarcinomas and renal cell carcinomas were negative whereas limited staining was found in some pancreatic adenocarcinomas. It is suggested that antibody AE14 may be useful, as a defined polypeptide-specific reagent, in the histologic distinction between mesotheliomas and most adenocarcinomas. Furthermore, the expression patterns of keratin 5 as detected by antibody AE14 in various normal and malignant epithelial tissues are discussed, particularly their relation to processes of squamous metaplasia and their indication of phenotypic tumor heterogeneity.
Monoclonal antibody HEA125 was used to study the tissue distribution of an epithelial cell surface glycoprotein of Mr 34,000 (Egp34). A large panel of normal and neoplastic tissues was examined for immunoreactivity with HEA125 by means of a sensitive immunoperoxidase technique. HEA125 labeled most epithelial cell types throughout the body but did not label any nonepithelial tissue. Major exceptions were epidermal keratinocytes, gastric parietal cells, hepatocytes, thymic cortical epithelial, and myoepithelial cells. Normal mesothelial cells were unreactive. In normal glandular epithelia and tubular adenocarcinomas exclusively the basolateral cell membranes were stained. HEA125 intensely reacted with all tested carcinoma specimens derived from colorectum, stomach, pancreas, liver, lung, mammary gland, ovary, thyroid, kidney, urinary bladder, and prostate including a number of anaplastic, diffusely infiltrating carcinomas. Metastatic lesions of these tumors were consistently positive. Generally, the staining of tumor cells was very homogeneous. The majority of squamous cell carcinomas were less strongly labeled than adenocarcinomas; keratinizing areas of the tumor masses were negative. Germ cell tumors and mesotheliomas of epithelioid type focally expressed the antigen. Egp34 was found to be absent from sarcomas, lymphomas, melanomas, and neurogenic tumors. Hence, HEA125 is a useful reagent for the distinction of carcinomas from nonepithelial neoplasms, even at very low degrees of histological differentiation. Furthermore, HEA125 allows the immunohistochemical detection of micrometastases originating from carcinomas. The antigen is detectable in formalin-fixed paraffin sections.
Toxic effects of commercially available peritoneal dialysate (PD) fluid include damage to mesothelial cells (MC), causing a severely disturbed proliferation of cultured MC. We investigated the injury to the cell membrane (by release of lactate dehydrogenase, LDH), the proliferation (by cell counts and by 3H-thymidine incorporation), and optional the cytokine generation (by IL-1 receptor-antagonist production, IL-1 ra) of cultured human MC during the 48 hours after a 30 minute exposure to PD containing either 35 mmol/liter sodium lactate or sodium pyruvate. All solutions had a pH of 5.2 to 5.6 and were composed as standard PD. Glucose contents of 1.36 and 3.86 mmol/liter were tested. After exposure to the lactate-PD containing 1.36% glucose, LDH activity was increased by more than 30%, proliferation of MC was inhibited by more than 30%, and IL-1 ra production was reduced significantly when compared to pyruvate-PD and the control solution. After preincubation with 3.86% glucose containing PD, all negative effects became even more pronounced in the lactate group whereas the MC maintained their integrity, rate of proliferation and IL-1 ra release after pre-exposure to pyruvate containing PD. These results suggest that the acute toxic effects of commercially available PD on the integrity, proliferation and IL-1 ra production of MC can be avoided by the use of sodium pyruvate instead of sodium lactate.
A new peritoneal dialysate containing pyruvate anions was developed in order to avoid cytotoxic effect of conventional lactate-based dialysate. The dialysate has a final pH of 5.4 to 5.6 and is composed of 1.36-3.86% glucose-monohydrate; 132 mmol/l sodium; 1.75 mmol/l calcium; 0.75 mmol/l magnesium; 102 mmol/l chloride and 35 mmol/l pyruvate. For cytotoxicity testing peritoneal macrophages, and mesothelial cells (MC) were exposed to conventional lactate dialysate, and pyruvate dialysate. We investigated the O2- generation and cytokine synthesis after endotoxin stimulation in peritoneal macrophages and the proliferation of mesothelial cells of cultured human MC. After exposure to lactate dialysate O2- generation and cytokine synthesis in peritoneal macrophages and proliferation of mesothelial cells were inhibited when compared to solution containing pyruvate and the control solution. After preincubation with 3.86% glucose containing solutions, all negative effects became even more pronounced in the lactate group whereas after pre-exposure to pyruvate containing solution the toxic effects were absent. These results suggest that the acute toxic effects of commercially available peritoneal dialysates can be avoided by the use of sodium pyruvate instead of sodium lactate.
Introduction: This study aims to investigate whether mesothelial cells could function as seed cells to construct tissue-engineered peritoneum-like tissue for urethral reconstruction in a rabbit model. Materials and Methods: Bladder acellular matrices were prepared and trimmed to 1.5 × 1 cm. Nine male rabbits underwent omentum biopsy and autologous mesothelial cells were isolated. After in vitro expansion, the cells were seeded onto the matrices and incubated for 7 days. In 18 rabbits, a pendulous urethral segment 1.5 cm long was totally excised and urethroplasty was performed with tubularized matrices seeded with cells in 9 animals and without cells in 9 as controls. Urethrography was performed at 1, 2 and 6 months postoperatively. Meanwhile, the neourethras were harvested and analyzed grossly and histologically. Results: Histological analysis of the cell-seeded grafts revealed a loose collagen matrix covered with a single layer of mesothelim. Serial urethrography indicated a wide urethral caliber without stricture formation in animals implanted with cell-seeded matrices, while all animals of the control group developed stricture. Histological analysis of the implanted cell-seeded matrices demonstrated a normal urethral architecture by 1 month, composed of multilayers of urothelium surrounded by smooth muscle bundles, which became increasingly organized with time. By 6 months, the neourethra could be hardly distinguished from native urethra both grossly and histologically. Conclusions: Autologous mesothelial cells could be successfully used as seed cells for tubularized urethral reconstruction in male rabbits.
Urothelial cells were obtained from the pelvicalyceal system of ten patients by retrograde pyelography using a 60% solution of meglumine diatrizoate (Hypaque meglumine 60%, Winthrop Laboratories, New York, New York). The cells showed some cellular shrinkage, nuclear pyknosis, fragmentation, and occasionally cytoplasmic vacuolization. Cells from bladder urine obtained from 14 patients after an intravenous urogram using a 50% solution of sodium diatrizoate (Hypaque sodium 50%) showed no cytologic changes. In vitro exposure of bladder urothelial cells to 50%, 25% and 12.5% Hypaque sodium and 60%, 30% and 15% Hypaque meglumine as well as exposure of mesothelial cells to 50% Hypaque sodium resulted in the same cytologic changes as those seen when the urothelium was exposed in vivo to this material during retrograde pyelography. The mechanism for this effect, therefore, is by direct action of the contrast media on the cells and is concentration dependent. The cytopathologist should be aware of the changes induced by radiographic contrast materials such as Hypaque sodium or meglumine when interpreting urine cytology. This knowledge may be useful in preventing false positive diagnoses.
The occurrence of intermediate-sized filaments containing prekeratin-like proteins ('cytokeratins') has been examined in various organs of rat and cow by electron microscopy and by immunofluorescence microscopy on frozen sections using antibodies to defined constitutive proteins of various types of intermediate-sized filaments (prekeratin, vimentin, desmin). Positive cytokeratin reaction and tonofilament-like structures have been observed in the following epithelia: epidermis; ductal, secretory, and myoepithelial cells of sweat glands; mammary gland duct; myoepithelial cells of lactating mammary gland; milk secreting cells of cow; ductal, secretory, and myoepithelial cells of various salivary glands; tongue mucosa; bile duct; excretory duct of pancreas; intestinal mucosa; urothelium; trachea; bronchi; thymus reticulum, including Hassall corpuscles; mesothelium; uterus; and ciliated cells of oviduct. None of the epithelial cells mentioned has shown significant reaction with antibodies to vimentin, the major component of the type of intermediate-sized filaments predominant in mesenchymal cells. The widespread, if not general occurrence of cytokeratin filaments in epithelial cells is emphasized, and it is proposed to use this specific structure as a criterion for true epithelial character or origin.