  BACKGROUND: Antibiotic therapy is thought to improve lung function in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) by decreasing neutrophil-derived inflammation. We investigated the origin and clinical significance of lactate in the chronically inflamed CF lung. METHODS: Lactate was measured in sputa of 18 exacerbated and 25 stable CF patients via spectrophotometry and gaschromatography. Lung function was assessed via spirometry. Seven patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and three patients with acute lung inflammation served as control groups. Neutrophil and bacterial lactate production was assessed under aerobic and anaerobic conditions. RESULTS: In sputum specimens of patients with respiratory exacerbations lactate concentrations decreased significantly (p<0.005) from 3.4±2.3mmol/L to 1.4±1.4mmol/L after 2-3weeks of intravenous antibiotics. Successful treatment was reflected in 16 patients (88.9%) by FVC increase associated with lactate decrease (p<0.05). In every single sputum lactate was detectable (3.0±3.1mmol/L, range 0.2-14.1mmol/L). Lactate was lower (1.6±0.8mmol/L) in sputa from seven COPD patients, and it was below the detection limit in three patients with acute lung inflammation. Neutrophil lactate production accumulated up to 10.5mmol/L after 4days, whereas bacterial lactate production did not appear to contribute substantially to sputum lactate concentrations. CONCLUSIONS: Successful antibiotic therapy is reflected by a decrease in lactate concentrations. Neutrophils are the most likely source for lactate in sputum of CF patients. Therefore lactate may be used to monitor responses to antibiotic therapy as an adjunct to lung function measurements.
  We report a case of hypersensitivity pneumonitis, possibly due to aerosolized colistin therapy for severe multi-resistant Gram-negative pneumonia. Microbiological eradication was achieved with colistin therapy, which was stopped after 12 days in view of rising eosinophilia and possible lung fibrosis. The eosinophil count started to normalize 3 days after stopping colistin therapy and the patient was eventually weaned to minimal ventilatory support.
  Pulmonary manifestations of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) typically include pleuritis, alveolar hemorrhage, and infectious pneumonia due to immunosuppression with less common entities including bronchiolitis, interstitial pneumonia, and pulmonary fibrosis. More rare manifestations include organizing pneumonia (OP) and diffuse alveolar damage (DAD). A similar but distinct entity of acute fibrinous and organizing pneumonia (AFOP), characterized by intra-alveolar fibrin deposition and associated organizing pneumonia, has been reported in association with connective tissue disorders, but has not been described in association with SLE. Reported herein is a patient with SLE and accompanying antiphospholipid syndrome with recent pulmonary embolism, persistent respiratory symptomology, and persistent radiographic abnormalities who underwent lung biopsy displaying features of AFOP. This case in conjunction with previous literature indicates that AFOP can be a manifestation of connective tissue disease including SLE and may be an underreported variant of medical lung disease due to overlap in histological characteristics with OP and DAD.
  Lu BR, Esquivel CO. A review of abdominal organ transplantation in cystic fibrosis. Pediatr Transplantation 2010. © 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Abstract:  With advances in medical treatments, patients with CF are having improved quality of life and living longer. Although pulmonary disease is still the leading cause of morbidity and mortality, this longevity has allowed for the development of other organ dysfunction, mainly liver and pancreas. This review discusses the abdominal organ complications and the role of abdominal organ transplantation in CF. Liver failure and portal hypertension complications are the most common indicators for liver transplantation in CF, and five-yr survival for isolated liver transplantation is >80%. Deficiency of pancreatic enzymes is almost universal and up to 40% of patients with CF can develop insulin-dependent diabetes, although the role of pancreas transplantation is less clear and needs further research. Finally, the need for lung transplantation should always be assessed and considered in combination with liver transplantation on a case-by-case basis.
  SUMMARY AT A GLANCE: For patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, a failure of heart rate to reduce by at least 14 beats/minute after the first minute of recovery following completion of a six-minute walk test is an independent predictor prognosis and of pulmonary hypertension. Background and Objective:  In patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), we sought to validate that abnormal heart rate recovery at one-minute (HRR1) after 6 minute walk test (MWT) predicts mortality and to explore the relationship between abnormal HRR1 and pulmonary hypertension (PH). Methods:  We identified IPF patients who performed a 6MWT as part of their clinical evaluation between 2006-2009 and were followed to lung transplantation or death. Right heart catheterization (RHC) data was collated and analyzed for the subgroup who had this procedure. Results:  There were 160 subjects who qualified for the survival analysis, and those with an abnormal HRR1 had worse survival than subjects with normal HRR1 (log-rank p = 0.01). Eight-two subjects had a right heart catheter (RHC); among them, abnormal HRR1 was associated with RHC-confirmed PH (X(2) = 4.83, p = 0.03) and had a sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, and negative predictive value of 52%, 74%, 41%, and 82% respectively for PH. In bivariate and multivariable analyses, abnormal HRR1 appeared to be the strongest predictor of RHC-confirmed PH (Odds Ratio [OR]= 4.0, 95%CI 1.17-13.69, p = 0.02 in the multivariable analysis). Conclusions:  This study adds to data that supports the validity of abnormal HRR1 as a predictor of mortality and of RHC-confirmed PH in IPF. Research is needed to further investigate the link between abnormal HRR1 and PH and to elucidate heart-lung interactions at work during exercise and recovery in patients with IPF.
  Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis is characterized by myofibroblast accumulation, extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and excessive collagen deposition. ECM-producing myofibroblasts may originate from epithelial cells through epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). TGF-β1 is an inducer of EMT in pulmonary epithelial cells in vitro and in vivo, though the mechanisms are unclear. We hypothesized that TGF-β1 induced EMT through Smad dependent and independent processes. To test this hypothesis, we studied the roles and mechanisms of TGF-β1 induced Smad and p38 Mitogen Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) signaling in EMT-related changes in pulmonary epithelial cells. Exposure of pulmonary epithelial 1HAEo- cells to TGF-β1 resulted in morphological and molecular changes of EMT over a 96-hour period; loss of cell-cell contact, cell elongation, down-regulation of E-cadherin, up-regulation of fibronectin, and up-regulation of collagen I. Both Smad2/3 and p38 MAPK signaling pathways were activated by TGF-β1. However, neither Smad2/3 nor p38 MAPK were required for the down-regulation of E-cadherin, yet p38 MAPK was associated with fibronectin up-regulation. Both Smad2/3 and p38 MAPK had a role in regulation of TGF-β1 induced collagen expression. Furthermore, these data demonstrate that Smads and p38 MAPK differentially regulate EMT-related changes in pulmonary epithelial cells. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
  Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β) plays a central role in the development of fibrosis by stimulating extracellular matrix accumulation, and signals either directly or indirectly through types I, II, and III (TβRI, II, and III) TGF-β receptor complexes. Ginsan, a polysaccharide extracted from Panax ginseng, has multiple immunomodulatory effects. Here, we examine whether ginsan regulates the fibrogenic process by interfering with TGF-β signaling pathways. TGF-β treatment of murine or human normal lung fibroblasts enhanced the levels of several fibrotic markers, including smooth muscle alpha actin (-SMA), collagen-1, and fibronectin. Interestingly, ginsan treatment either before or after TGF-β administration led to significant reductions in all of -SMA, collagen-1, and fibronectin expression levels. Ginsan not only inhibited phosphorylation of Smad2 and Smad3, but also attenuated pERK and pAKT signaling induced by TGF-β. Moreover, ginsan restored TβRIII protein expression, which was significantly downregulated by TGF-β, but reduced TβRI and TβRII protein levels. In a murine model of bleomycin (BLM)-induced pulmonary fibrosis, ginsan significantly suppressed accumulation of collagen, -SMA, and TGF-β. These data collectively suggest that ginsan acts as an effective anti-fibrotic agent in the treatment of pulmonary fibrosis by blocking multiple TGF-β signaling pathways. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
  The latent TGF-ß binding proteins (LTBP-1 -3, and -4) assist in the secretion and localization of latent TGF-ß molecules. Ltbp3(-/-) and Ltbp4S(-/-) mice have distinct phenotypes and only in the lungs does deficiency of either Ltbp-3 or Ltbp-4 cause developmental abnormalities. To determine if these two LTBPs have additional common functions, we generated mice deficient for both Ltbp-3 and Ltbp-4S. The only novel defect in Ltbp3(-/-);Ltbp4S(-/-) mice was an early lethality compared to mice with single mutations. In addition lung abnormalities were exacerbated and the terminal air sac septation defect was more severe in Ltbp3(-/-);Ltbp4S(-/-) mice than in Ltbp4S(-/-) mice. Decreased cellularity of Ltbp3(-/-);Ltbp4S(-/-) lungs was correlated with higher rate of apoptosis in newborn lungs of Ltbp3(-/-);Ltbp4S(-/-) animals compared to WT, Ltbp3(-/-), and Ltbp4S(-/-) mice. No differences in the maturation of the major lung cell types were discerned between the single and double mutant mice. However, the distribution of Type 2 cells and myofibroblasts was abnormal, and myofibroblast segregation in some areas might be an indication of early fibrosis. We also observed differences in ECM composition between Ltbp3(-/-);Ltbp4S(-/-) and Ltbp4S(-/-) lungs after birth, reflected in decreased incorporation of fibrillin-1 and -2 in Ltbp3(-/-);Ltbp4S(-/-) matrix. The function of the lungs of Ltbp3(-/-);Ltbp4S(-/-) mice after the first week of life was potentially further compromised by macrophage infiltration, as proteases secreted from macrophages might exacerbate developmental emphysema. Together these data indicate that LTBP-3 and -4 perform partially overlapping functions only in the lungs. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
  Chronic lung inflammation caused by bacterial pathogenesis through activation of nuclear factor kappa B (NFκB)-responsive proinflammatory genes is a major hurdle in the management of lung disease in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. The authors generated a disease-relevant cell-based high-content screen to identify novel anti-inflammatory compounds for treating lung inflammation in CF. The human bronchial epithelial cell line KKLEB, harboring the most common form of mutation that causes CF, was modified to express an NFκB-responsive green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter. After creation, the cell line was tested for its ability to respond to disease-relevant inflammatory stimuli elicited by treatment of cells with filtrates of Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolated from the airways of a CF patient. P. aeruginosa filtrates potently activated NFκB-responsive GFP reporter expression in cells. Subsequently, the assay was optimized for high-throughput screening (HTS) through generation of a Z factor (∼0.5) and by testing its tolerance to the commonly used solvents ethanol and DMSO. A pilot library of clinically approved compounds was screened for assay validation. Several compounds with known NFκB inhibitory activity were identified, including several steroidal compounds that have been clinically tested in CF. Thus, the assay can be used in a broader HTS campaign to find anti-inflammatory agents for use in CF.
  The long-term persistance of P. aeruginosa in the cystic fibrosis (CF) lung is characterized by the selection of a variety of genotypes and phenotypes that typically descend from one infecting P. aeruginosa clone, a process known as adaptive radiation. This adaptation process of P. aeruginosa includes complex physiological changes that likely confer a selective advantage to better thrive in the diverse niches and microenvironments of the inflamed and hostile CF airways. The occurrence of P. aeruginosa variants is fixed by mutation and selection. Common loss-of-function mutations in genes such as lasR, mucA and mexT lead to a general adaptation pattern and P. aeruginosa variants with increased antimicrobial resistance, alginate overproduction, reduced acute virulence, and improved metabolic fitness. Strikingly, several virulence-associated traits and immunostimulatory components of P. aeruginosa are turned off. In contrast, other cellular factors are positively selected such as the outer membrane protein OprF, the blue copper protein azurin, the cytochrome c peroxidase c551, and the enzymes of the arginine deiminase pathway ArcA-ArcD. These metabolic components probably are required for the optimal anaerobic or microaerobic growth and viability of P. aeruginosa within CF airways. Besides these common adaptations found by the comparison of P. aeruginosa isolates from different CF patients, the overall diversity of isogenic isolates from one CF patient is extended by variable changes in the expression of regulatory-, transport-, metabolic-, and virulence-associated genes. A better understanding of the microevolution of P. aeruginosa towards niche specialists according the selection pressure in the CF lung is a prerequisite to develop new strategies for the detection of P. aeruginosa variants, the antipseudomonal treatment, the prediction of the infectious disease state, and the development of efficient vaccines.
  Background.&#x2003; Antibiotic combination therapy might be more efficient than single antibiotics to combat Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms in the airways of patients with cystic fibrosis. We tested the ability of colistin sulphate&#x2013;tobramycin combinations and single antibiotics to kill P. aeruginosa biofilms. Methods.&#x2003; P. aeruginosa biofilms were generated in vitro and in rat lungs. In a pilot study, 5 patients with cystic fibrosis inhaled colistin and then tobramycin for 4 weeks. The changes in P. aeruginosa counts and lung function were assessed before and after therapy. Results.&#x2003; Antibiotic combination therapy significantly reduced the number of P. aeruginosa cells in P. aeruginosa biofilm models in vitro. When rats were challenged with [Formula: see text] cfu of P. aeruginosa, which was embedded in alginate beads, mortality rates, lung pathologic findings, and bacterial colony&#x2010;forming unit counts were significantly lower after 7 days in animals receiving antibiotic combination than in animals receiving single antibiotics. In patients with cystic fibrosis, inhaled colistin&#x2010;tobramycin was well tolerated and resulted in a mean decrease of [Formula: see text] log<inf>10</inf> cfu of P. aeruginosa per milliliter of sputum ([Formula: see text]). Measurements of forced expiratory volume in 1 s, obtained both before and after the study, did not differ significantly. Conclusion.&#x2003; Colistin&#x2010;tobramycin combinations are more efficient than respective single antibiotics for killing P. aeruginosa in biofilms in vitro, and they significantly reduced P. aeruginosa cell counts in a rat lung infection model and in patients with cystic fibrosis.
  We describe the design, synthesis, and optimization of first-in-class series of inhibitors of NADPH oxidase isoform 4 (Nox4), an enzyme implicated in several pathologies, in particular idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, a life-threatening and orphan disease. Initially, several moderately potent pyrazolopyridine dione derivatives were found during a high-throughput screening campaign. SAR investigation around the pyrazolopyridine dione core led to the discovery of several double-digit nanomolar inhibitors in cell free assays of reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, showing high potency on Nox4 and Nox1. The compounds have little affinity for Nox2 isoform and are selective for Nox4/1 isoforms. The specificity of these compounds was confirmed in an extensive in vitro pharmacological profile, as well as in a counterscreening assay for potential ROS scavenging. Concomitant benefits are good oral bioavailability and high plasma concentrations in vivo, allowing further clinical trials for the potential treatment of fibrotic diseases, cancers, and cardiovascular and metabolic diseases.
  Exposure to silica is associated with progressive pulmonary inflammation and fibrosis. Our previous study had demonstrated silica exposure could cause cell cycle alternation and activator protein-1 (AP-1) activation. This study showed that silica exposure induced phosphorylation of p70S6 kinase (p70S6K) and Akt in human embryo lung fibroblasts (HELFs). These changes were blocked by overexpression of dominant-negative mutants of phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (Δp85) or Akt (DN-Akt), respectively. Moreover, pretreatment of cells with rapamycin, a specific p70S6K inhibitor, could inhibit silica-induced cell cycle alteration, AP-1 activation, and phosphorylation of p70S6K, but had no effect on Akt phosphorylation. This suggested that phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI-3K)/AP-1 pathway was likely responsible for cell cycle changes. Furthermore, we observed the effect of the pathway on cell cycle regulatory proteins. Our results indicated that inactivation of PI-3K, Akt, or p70S6K could inhibit silica-induced overexpression of cyclin D1 and cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) and decreased expression of E2F-4. Taken together, silica could induce cell cycle changes through PI-3K/ AP-1 pathway in HELFs. Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
  HISTORY: Small bowel resection had to be performed because of an acute ileus in a 16-year old girl with mucoviscidosis. Severe respiratory insufficiency developed and she was transferred to the intensive care unit. INVESTIGATIONS: The clinical signs of a severe ARDS were demonstrated: Horowitz index < 200, pO (2) 57 mm Hg, FiO (2) 1,0, pCO (2) 82 mm Hg. Candida serology was positive (titer 1 : 5120), and there was a leukocytosis (20 000/µl), hypalbuminemia (14 g/l) and elevation of C-reactive protein (190 mg/l). TREATMENT AND COURSE: Because all non invasive treatment options had failed to improve the patient's condition, an extracorporal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) device was connected. Seven days later, after the pulmonary situation had improved, the device wassuccessfully removed; the patient was dicharged in a satisfactory condition after another month. CONCLUSION: ECMO is a another treatment option for serious ARDS in infection-related worsening of pulmonary cystic fibrosis.
  Aging is a natural process characterized by a progressive functional impairment and reduced capacity to respond adaptively to environmental stimuli. Aging is associated with increased susceptibility to a variety of chronic diseases, including type 2 diabetes mellitus, cancer, and neurological diseases. Lung pathologies are not the exception, and the prevalence of several interstitial lung diseases (ILDs), primarily idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, has been found to increase considerably with age. Although our understanding of the biology of aging has advanced remarkably in the last 2 decades, the molecular mechanisms linking aging to ILD remain unclear. Immunosenescence, oxidative stress, abnormal shortening of telomeres, apoptosis, and epigenetic changes affecting gene expression have been proposed to contribute to the aging process, and aging-associated diseases. Here, we review the emerging concepts highlighting the putative aging-associated abnormalities involved in some human ILDs.
  In patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) prevention of lung infections with Pseudomonas aeruginosa is of major importance. Principles to achieve this goal include vaccination, immediate use of antibiotics in patients newly colonized with the pathogen, and hygienic measures. The purpose of this review is to discuss recent developments in this context.
  Objective: To observe the expressions of matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) in rats with pulmonary fibrosis (PF) induced by bleomycin, and to explore the mechanisms of Shenlong Decoction in preventing and treating PF. Methods: A total of 230 Wistar rats were divided into normal control group, untreated group, prednisone group, and low-, medium- and high-dose Shenlong Decoction groups. Wistar rats were intratracheally injected with bleomycin to induce PF. From the 2nd day, rats in the normal control and untreated groups were lavaged with normal saline (NS), and rats in the other groups were lavaged with prepared Shenlong Decoction by the same amount. Hemotoxylin-eosin (HE) staining and Masson staining were used to observe pathological changes in lung tissue at different time points, and to evaluate whether the model was successfully induced. Expressions of MMP-2 and TIMP-1 mRNAs in rats' lung tissue were measured by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Results: Expressions of MMP-2 and TIMP-1 mRNAs in lung tissue of rats were observed from all groups at each time point. In comparison with the normal control group, on the 7th day, the transcription levels of MMP-2 and TIMP-1 mRNAs, especially the former, of the untreated group increased significantly (P<0.05 or P<0.01). On the 14th day, the transcription levels of MMP-2 and TIMP-1 mRNAs kept rising, especially the latter (P<0.05 or P<0.01). On the 28th day, the transcription level of MMP-2 decreased a little, while the transcription level of TIMP-1 mRNA did not stop increasing (P<0.05 or P<0.01). Compared with the untreated group, decrease of the transcription levels of MMP-2 and TIMP-1 mRNAs were observed in the treatment groups, especially the former, and this effect continued to the 28th day with the medium-dose Shenlong Decoction group decreasing most obviously (P<0.05 or P<0.01). Conclusion: Shenlong Decoction may inhibit the expression of MMP-2 mRNA by up-regulating the expression of TIMP-1 mRNA so as to slow the progression of PF.
  The development of drugs able to inhibit the expression of pro-inflammatory genes is of great interest in the treatment of cystic fibrosis (CF). Chronic pulmonary inflammation in the lungs of patients affected by CF is characterized by massive intra-bronchial infiltrates of neutrophils. This process is initiated upon interaction of pathogens (including Pseudomonas aeruginosa) with surface bronchial cells. Consequently, they release cytokines, the most represented being the potent neutrophilic chemokine Interleukin (IL)-8 and the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-6. The chronic inflammatory process is crucial, since it leads to progressive tissue damage and severe respiratory insufficiency. In order to reduce the adverse effects of the excessive inflammatory response, one of the approaches leading to inhibition of IL-8 and IL-6 gene expression is the transcription factor (TF) decoy approach, based on intracellular delivery of double stranded oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs) mimicking the binding sites of TFs and causing inhibition of binding of TFrelated proteins to regulatory sequences identified in the promoters of specific genes. Since the promoters of IL-8 and IL-6 contain consensus sequences for NF-κ B and Sp1, double stranded TF "decoy" ODNs targeting NF-κB and Sp1 can be used. Alternatively, screening of drugs targeting relevant TFs can be performed using drug cocktails constituted by extracts from medicinal plants inhibiting TF/DNA interactions. Finally, virtual screening might lead to identification of putative bioactive molecules to be validated using molecular and cellular approaches. By these means, low-molecular drugs targeting NF-κB and inhibiting IL-8 gene expression are available for pre-clinical testing using experimental systems recapitulating chronic pulmonary inflammation of patients affected by CF.
  In patients with atrial fibrillation, a betablocker is generally used initially to prevent recurrence or to slow the heart rate. Amiodarone is a last resort, mainly because of its numerous adverse effects. Dronedarone, chemically similar to amiodarone,was recently authorised for this indication in the European Union. In a double-blind trial versus amiodarone in 504 patients, the failure rate was significantly higher with dronedarone (75.1% versus 58.8%). Two placebo-controlled trials in heart failure patients yielded conflicting results. Dronedarone was associated with a statistically significant increase in mortality in a trial in 627 symptomatic patients free of arrhythmias. However, there was no statistically significant difference in a trial including 4630 patients with atrial fibrillation and a lower risk of cardiovascular events. There are no comparative trials versus other antiarrhythmic drugs or heart-rate-lowering agents, including betablockers and calcium channel blockers. Like other antiarrhythmic drugs, dronedarone also has arrhythmogenic effects, including bradycardia and QT prolongation. Other adverse effects include diarrhoea, nausea and vomiting, and cutaneous disorders. Transient elevation of creatinine levels is also frequent, and cases of renal failure have been reported. In the trial versus amiodarone, dronedarone had a different pattern of short-term adverse effects, including more gastrointestinal disorders but less frequent thyroid disorders, neurological disorders, hypersensitivity reactions, hypertension, and QT prolongation. Little is known of potential long-term adverse effects, especially pulmonary fibrosis. In practice, dronedarone is better tolerated but less effective than amiodarone in the short term.When antiarrhythmic drug therapy is needed, it is better to continue to use a betablocker or, as a last resort, amiodarone, a drug with better-documented adverse effects, especially during long-term treatment.
  Ammonium perchlorate (AP), an oxidizer, has been used in solid propellants. Although AP exposure has been suspected as a risk factor for the development of pulmonary fibrosis, data are still inconclusive. To evaluate the pulmonary toxicity and the potential pulmonary fibrosis caused by occupational exposure to this compound, 25 male rabbits were randomly allocated into five groups to receive AP or bleomycin or saline by intratracheal injection. All rabbits were sacrificed and total RNA from the lungs was extracted. Expressions of types I and III collagens, transforming growth factor-β(1) (TGF-β(1)) and tumour necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) messenger RNA (mRNA) were measured by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The expressions of type I and III collagen mRNA in low, moderate and high dose AP groups were significantly higher (p < 0.01 or p < 0.05) than that in the saline group. There was also a significant increased level of TGF-β(1) and TNF-α mRNA in the three AP groups compared with saline control group (p < 0.01 or p < 0.05). These results reveal that AP can increase gene expressions of types I, III collagens, TGF-β(1) and TNF-α in lung of rabbits exposed to AP. The overexpression of these biomarkers were considered as effective indicator linking to the development of pulmonary fibrosis and finally demonstrated that AP has potential to induce pulmonary fibrosis.
  Background and aim: Toll-like Receptors (TLRs), a key component of the innate immunity, are recently implicated in the pathogenesis of interstitial lung diseases (ILDs). As the involvement of TLRs has not yet been fully elucidated, the aim of the current study was to examine the expression of various TLRs in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) of patients with ILDs. Patients and Methods: We studied prospectively three groups of patients: (i) one group of 35 patients with fibrotic disorders; 16 with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and 19 with fibrotic interstitial pneumonias associated to collagen tissue disorders (CTD-IPs), (ii) one group of 14 patients with pulmonary sarcoidosis, and (iii) 11 normal subjects. We evaluated TLRs' expression with flow cytometry and mRNA expression with real-time PCR. RESULTS: An overexpression of TLR-3 mRNA was found in fibrotic disorders (CTD-IPs/IPF) in comparison with sarcoidosis (mean +/- SD, 1.104+/-1.087 versus 0.038+/-0.03, p=0.04). Additionally, TLR-3 mRNA was increased in CTD-IPs in comparison with IPF (p=0.001), sarcoidosis (p=0.002), and controls (p=0.05). An upregulation in TLR-7 and -9 mRNA expression was detected in IPF (p=0.05) and sarcoidosis (p=0.05) respectively, when compared to controls. A higher percentage of TLR-9 expressing cells was found in BALF of CTD-IPs when compared to IPF (mean +/- SD, 36.7+/-7.06 versus 14.85+/-3.82, p=0.025). CONCLUSION: We observed distinct profiles of TLRs' expression in fibrotic and granulomatous disorders. It is likely that they could play a key role in the pathogenesis of these diseases and represent future therapeutic targets.
  OBJECTIVE:: Connective tissue diseases (CTD) are associated with several interstitial lung diseases. The recently individualized syndrome of combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema (CPFE) has not previously been described in a CTD patient population. METHODS:: This multicenter study retrospectively investigated data from CTD patients with CPFE. Demographics and results of pulmonary function testing, high resolution computed tomography, lung biopsy, treatment, and outcomes were analyzed. RESULTS:: Data from 34 patients (23 males) with CTD (rheumatoid arthritis, n=18; systemic sclerosis [SSc], n=10; mixed or overlap CTD, n=4; other, n=2) spanning a mean duration ± standard deviation (SD) of 8.3 ± 7.0 years were analyzed. Mean age ± SD was 57 ± 11 years; 30 patients were current or ex-smokers. All patients exhibited emphysema of the upper lung zones and pulmonary fibrosis of the lower zones on HRCT. Dyspnea on exertion was present in all cases. Moderate impairment in pulmonary function test results and markedly reduced carbon monoxide transfer capacity were observed. Five patients with SSc exhibited pulmonary hypertension. Four patients died during follow-up. Patients with CTD and CPFE were significantly younger in comparison to a historical control group of patients with idiopathic CPFE, and more frequently female. They had higher lung volumes, lower diffusion capacity, higher pulmonary pressures, and were more frequently males than those with CTD and lung fibrosis without emphysema. CONCLUSIONS:: CPFE warrants inclusion as a novel, distinct pulmonary manifestation within the spectrum of CTD-associated lung disease in smokers or ex-smokers, especially in patients with rheumatoid arthritis or SSc.
  Objective. Systemic sclerosis-associated pulmonary arterial hypertension (SScPAH) has a disturbed function of the right ventricle (RV) when compared to idiopathic PAH (IPAH). Systemic sclerosis may also affect the heart. We hypothesize that RV differences may occur at the level of interstitial inflammation and-fibrosis and compared inflammatory cell infiltrate and fibrosis between the RV of SScPAH, IPAH, and healthy controls. Methods. Paraffin-embedded tissue samples of RV and left ventricle (LV) from SScPAH (n = 5) and IPAH (n = 9) patients and controls (n = 4) were picrosirius red stained for detection of interstitial fibrosis, which was quantified semiautomatically. Neutrophilic granulocytes (MPO), macrophages (CD68), and lymphocytes (CD45) were immunohistochemically stained and only interstitial leukocytes were counted. Presence of epi- or endocardial inflammation, and of perivascular or intimal fibrosis of coronary arteries was assessed semiquantitatively (0-3: absent to extensive). Results. RV's of SScPAH showed significantly more inflammatory cells than of IPAH (cells/mm(2), mean ± sd MPO 11 ± 3 versus 6 ± 1; CD68 11 ± 3 versus 6 ± 1; CD45 11 ± 1 versus 5 ± 1 , P < .05) and than of controls. RV interstitial fibrosis was similar in SScPAH and IPAH (4 ± 1 versus 5 ± 1%, P = .9), and did not differ from controls (5 ± 1%, P = .8). In 4 SScPAH and 5 IPAH RV's foci of replacement fibrosis were found. No differences were found on epi- or endocardial inflammation or on perivascular or intimal fibrosis of coronary arteries. Conclusion. SScPAH RVs display denser inflammatory infiltrates than IPAH, while they do not differ with respect to interstitial fibrosis. Whether increased inflammatory status is a contributor to altered RV function in SScPAH warrants further research.
  Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and its metabolite adenosine regulate airway mucociliary clearance via activation of purinoceptors. In this study, we investigated the contribution of goblet cells to airway epithelial ATP release. Primary human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cultures, typically dominated by ciliated cells, were induced to develop goblet cell metaplasia by infection with respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) or treatment with interleukin-13 (IL-13). Under resting conditions, goblet cell metaplastic cultures displayed enhanced mucin secretion, which was accompanied by increased rates of ATP release and mucosal surface adenosine accumulation as compared to non-metaplastic control HBE cultures. Intracellular calcium chelation [1,2-bis(o-aminophenoxy)ethane-N,N,N',N'-tetraacetic acid tetraacetoxymethyl ester (BAPTA-AM)] or disruption of the secretory pathways (nocodazole, brefeldin A, and N-ethylmaleimide) decreased both mucin secretion and ATP release in goblet cell metaplastic HBE cultures. Conversely, stimuli that triggered calcium-regulated mucin secretion, e.g., ionomycin or UTP, increased luminal ATP release and adenyl purine accumulation in control and goblet cell metaplastic HBE cultures. Goblet cell-associated ATP release was not blocked by the connexin/pannexin hemichannel inhibitor, carbenoxolone, suggesting direct nucleotide release from goblet cell vesicles rather than the hemichannel insertion. Collectively, our data demonstrate that nucleotide release is increased by goblet cell metaplasia, reflecting, at least in part, a mechanism tightly associated with goblet cell mucin secretion. Increased goblet cell nucleotide release and resultant adenosine accumulation provide compensatory mechanisms to i) hydrate mucins by paracrine stimulation of ciliated cell ion/water secretion and maintain mucociliary clearance and ii) modulate inflammatory responses.
  Introduction: Injury to alveolar epithelial cells is central to the pathophysiology of Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis (IPF). An abnormal autoimmune response directed against antigens of the alveolar epithelium may contribute to the disease. METHODS: To detect circulating autoantibodies (Ab) directed against epithelial structures, we performed immunoblot by separating human placental amnion extract or alveolar epithelial cells (A549 cell line) proteins on polyacrylamide gels, blotting on nitrocellulose membranes and incubating with serum from patients with IPF (n=40), or healthy subjects (n=40). Proteomic analysis and mass spectrometry characterized the target protein. Inhibition experiments performed with the correspondent recombinant protein confirmed our results. RESULTS: We identified IgG autoAbs recognizing a 200 kDa protein in the serum of IPF patients. Proteomic analysis identified this protein as human periplakin (PPL) a component of desmosomes. Anti-PPL Abs were found by immunoblot in both serum and BAL in IPF patients : 16/40 (40%) of them were positive versus none of the control subjects. Immunohistochemistry revealed that PPL was strongly expressed in bronchial and alveolar epithelium, but that PPL exhibited changes in intracellular localization among normal and fibrotic alveolar epithelium. In an alveolar epithelial wound repair assay, an antiPPL IgG decreased cell migration. Recombinant PPL induced BAL T lymphocytes proliferation. IPF patients with anti-PPL Abs had a more severe respiratory disease, despite no difference in survival. CONCLUSION: We found a new circulating autoAb directed against PPL in IPF patients, associated with a more severe disease.
  RATIONALE: The markedly improved life expectancy of children with cystic fibrosis (CF) has created a new challenge, as traditional markers of lung disease are frequently normal in young children. This prevents identification of individuals who may benefit from more aggressive therapy, and also obliges large study numbers and prolonged duration for intervention studies. There is an urgent need for alternative surrogates which detect early lung disease, and which track through early childhood. OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to determine whether multiple-breath washout results at preschool age can predict subsequent abnormal lung function. METHODS: Preschool children (3-5 yrs) with CF and healthy controls underwent spirometry and multiple-breath washout with testing repeated during early school-age (6-10 yrs). Primary outcomes were FEV1 from spirometry and Lung Clearance Index (LCI) from multiple-breath washout. MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Forty-eight children with CF and 45 healthy children completed testing. Thirty-five (73%) children with CF had abnormal LCI at preschool age, whilst only 5 had abnormal FEV1. The positive predictive value of preschool LCI for predicting any abnormal school-age result was 94%, with a negative predictive value of 62%. Only one child with abnormal FEV1 at school-age had had a normal preschool LCI. In contrast, for preschool FEV1 the positive predictive value was 100%, but negative predictive value only 25%. CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that an abnormal preschool LCI predicts subsequent lung function abnormalities, whereas a normal preschool LCI usually remains normal. MBW has potential as a clinical and research outcome in young children with CF.
  Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a progressive, life-threatening, interstitial lung disease of unknown etiology. The median survival of patients with IPF is only two to three years, yet, some patients live much longer. Respiratory failure resulting from disease progression is the most frequent cause of death. To date we have limited information as to predictors of mortality in patients with IPF and research in this area has failed to yield prediction models that can be reliably used in clinical practice to predict individual risk of mortality. The goal of this concise clinical review is to examine and summarize the current data on the clinical course, individual predictors of survival, and proposed clinical prediction models in IPF. Finally, we will discuss challenges and future directions related to predicting survival in IPF.
  Pseudomonas aeruginosa is the major pathogen of chronic lung infections in individuals with cystic fibrosis (CF). Traditionally, it has been regarded as living in planktonic form, and as being able to perform only simple physiological activities. Recent studies in biofilm infections in CF patients, however, show that P. aeruginosa can perform many social behaviors, like cooperation and cheating. Based on the theory of "survival of the fittest", it may be presumed that every individual will take advantage of cheating instead of cooperation to increase its fitness, at the cost of group survival. In reality, however, a bacterial society can remain stable, even though cheaters arise frequently in the population. It is therefore possible that there are anti-cheating mechanisms in a bacterial society. The cheaters of P. aeruginosa will cause the loss or the decrease of the pathogenesis of the microorganism in the cystic fibrosis host. These defects in pathogenesis will be disadvantageous to bacterial colonization and compromise the resistance to host immunity. We therefore propose the hypothesis that the pathogenesis in cystic fibrosis lung infections could be one of the anti-cheating mechanisms that contribute to the hidden costs of the cheater strains. To test this hypothesis, we designed an experiment in an animal model of CF. If this hypothesis can be confirmed, it will illustrate that nontrivial analogies exist between microbial social behaviors and the social traits that are observed in the more traditional model systems for sociobiology. This will not only provide a genetic model for sociobiology research, but also cast light on the social control of chronic bacterial infections.
  RATIONALE AND OBJECTIVES: The use of hyperpolarized (3)He magnetic resonance imaging as a quantitative lung imaging tool has progressed rapidly in the past decade, mostly in the assessment of the airway diseases chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma. This technique has shown potential to assess both structural and functional information in healthy and diseased lungs. In this study, the regional measurements of structure and function were applied to a bleomycin rat model of interstitial lung disease. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Male Sprague-Dawley rats (weight, 300-350 g) were administered intratracheal bleomycin. After 3 weeks, apparent diffusion coefficient and fractional ventilation were measured by (3)He magnetic resonance imaging and pulmonary function testing using a rodent-specific plethysmography chamber. Sensitized and healthy animals were then compared using threshold analysis to assess the potential sensitivity of these techniques to pulmonary abnormalities. RESULTS: No significant changes were observed in total lung volume and compliance between the two groups. Airway resistance elevated and forced expiratory volume significantly declined in the 3-week bleomycin rats, and fractional ventilation was significantly decreased compared to control animals (P < .0004). The apparent diffusion coefficient of (3)He showed a smaller change but still a significant decrease in 3-week bleomycin animals (P < .05). CONCLUSIONS: Preliminary results suggest that quantitative (3)He magnetic resonance imaging can be a sensitive and noninvasive tool to assess changes in an animal interstitial lung disease model. This technique may be useful for longitudinal animal studies and also in the investigation of human interstitial lung diseases.
  BACKGROUND: Hyperactivity of the epithelial sodium (Na+) channel (ENaC) and increased Na+ absorption by airway epithelial cells leading to airway surface liquid dehydration and impaired mucociliary clearance are thought to play an important role in the pathogenesis of cystic fibrosis (CF) pulmonary disease. In airway epithelial cells, ENaC is constitutively activated by endogenous trypsin-like serine proteases such as Channel-Activating Proteases (CAPs). It was recently reported that ENaC activity could also be stimulated by apical treatment with human neutrophil elastase (hNE) in a human airway epithelial cell line, suggesting that hNE inhibition could represent a novel therapeutic approach for CF lung disease. However, whether hNE can also activate Na+ reabsorption in primary human nasal epithelial cells (HNEC) from control or CF patients is currently unknown. METHODS: We evaluated by short-circuit current (Isc) measurements the effects of hNE and EPI-hNE4, a specific hNE inhibitor, on ENaC activity in primary cultures of HNEC obtained from control (9) and CF (4) patients. RESULTS: Neither hNE nor EPI-hNE4 treatments did modify Isc in control and CF HNEC. Incubation with aprotinin, a Kunitz-type serine protease inhibitor that blocks the activity of endogenous CAPs, decreased Isc by 27.6% and 54% in control and CF HNEC, respectively. In control and CF HNEC pretreated with aprotinin, hNE did significantly stimulate Isc, an effect which was blocked by EPI-hNE4. DISCUSSION: These results indicate that hNE does activate ENaC and transepithelial Na+ transport in both normal and CF HNEC, on condition that the activity of endogenous CAPs is first inhibited. CONCLUSIONS: The potent inhibitory effect of EPI-hNE4 on hNE-mediated ENaC activation observed in our experiments highlights that the use of EPI-hNE4 could be of interest to reduce ENaC hyperactivity in CF airways.
  BACKGROUND: Lung infection by various organisms is a characteristic feature of cystic fibrosis (CF). CFTR genotype effects acquisition of Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Pa), however the effect on acquisition of other infectious organisms that frequently precede Pa is relatively unknown. Understanding the role of CFTR in the acquisition of organisms first detected in patients may help guide symptomatic and molecular-based treatment for CF. METHODS: Lung infection, defined as a single positive respiratory tract culture, was assessed for 13 organisms in 1,381 individuals with CF. Subjects were divided by predicted CFTR function: 'Residual': carrying at least one partial function CFTR mutation (class IV or V) and 'Minimal' those who do not carry a partial function mutation. Kaplan-Meier estimates were created to assess CFTR effect on age of acquisition for each organism. Cox proportional hazard models were performed to control for possible cofactors. A separate Cox regression was used to determine whether defining infection with Pa, mucoid Pa or Aspergillus (Asp) using alternative criteria affected the results. The influence of severity of lung disease at the time of acquisition was evaluated using stratified Cox regression methods by lung disease categories. RESULTS: Subjects with 'Minimal' CFTR function had a higher hazard than patients with 'Residual' function for acquisition of 9 of 13 organisms studied (HR ranging from 1.7 to 3.78 based on the organism studied). Subjects with minimal CFTR function acquired infection at a younger age than those with residual function for 12 of 13 organisms (p-values ranging: <0.001 to 0.017). Minimal CFTR function also associated with younger age of infection when 3 alternative definitions of infection with Pa, mucoid Pa or Asp were employed. Risk of infection is correlated with CFTR function for 8 of 9 organisms in patients with good lung function (>90%ile) but only 1 of 9 organisms in those with poorer lung function (<50%ile). CONCLUSIONS: Residual CFTR function correlates with later onset of respiratory tract infection by a wide spectrum of organisms frequently cultured from CF patients. The protective effect conferred by residual CFTR function is diminished in CF patients with more advanced lung disease.
  A 43-year-old woman had a pulmonary tumor detected by a computed tomographic (CT) scan during follow-up for breast cancer 15 years previously. The tumor showed a solid mass measuring 42 × 32 × 12 mm in extensive contact with the pleura of the apex of the left upper lobe. The edge of the tumor was relatively well-defined with an irregular shape, and a bubblelike area was seen within it. The longitudinal slice high-resolution CT findings showed a flat and thick mass, and its inferior border was distinct and horizontal. The pathological findings by a thoracoscopic lung biopsy showed a localized pulmonary fibrosis of the apex, a so-called pulmonary apical cap (PAC). With the recent advances in CT scan technology, the detection of PACs is very likely to increase, and they must be differentiated from superior sulcus tumors.
  Methotrexate (MTX) has been used as the first-line disease-modifying antirheumatic drug (DMARD) in patients with early progressive rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Several severe side effects such as myelosuppression, hepato-, nephro-, and pulmonary toxicities have been reported. However, the pathogenic mechanism of MTX-induced pulmonary fibrosis is still unknown. Here, we evaluated the morphological and biological changes of the pulmonary fibrosis in mice treated with MTX. Three, four and five weeks after consecutive administration of MTX (3 mg/kg/day), hydroxyproline content in the lung tissues increased significantly to about 2 times higher that of the control level. This result closely reflected to the results of hematoxylin and eosin (HE) and Azan stains. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that MTX treatment resulted in a decrease of alveolar epithelial cells and an increase of fibroblast cells in the mouse lung tissues. When we examined the effects of MTX on primary mouse alveolar epithelial cell (MAEC) and mouse lung fibroblast (MLF) survival in vitro, the efficiency of MTX-induced cytotoxicity and apoptosis in MAEC was more sensitive than MLF cells. Thus, our results indicate that the administration of MTX by an oral route could induce a fibrotic response with cell dysfunction of the alveolar epithelium by which MTX-induced apoptosis. Our results thus suggest that MTX could induce alveolar epithelial cell injury and resulted in the loss of integrity of the alveolar-capillary barrier basement membranes followed by the recruitment and proliferation of myofibroblasts with the deposition of collagens.
  We present a 54-year-old man employed in the field of hard metal manufacturing who complained of progressive dyspnea and weight loss. His chest radiograph showed bilateral fibrosis predominantly distributed in the upper lobes with bilateral pleural effusions, and a strong reduction in lung volume. Lung histopathology showed apical cap-like fibrosis but no giant cell interstitial pneumonia. Electron probe microanalysis detected tungsten deposits in the fibrotic region: we therefore considered this to be a case of hard metal disease. Hard metal disease should be considered as one possibility in the differential diagnosis of upper lobe-dominant pulmonary fibrosis.
  BACKGROUND: A significant genetic component has been described for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). The R131H (rs1801274) polymorphism of the IgG receptor FcgammaRIIa determines receptor affinity for IgG subclasses and is associated with several chronic inflammatory diseases. We investigated whether this polymorphism is associated with IPF susceptibility or progression. METHODS: In a case-control study, we compared the distribution of FcgammaRIIa R131H genotypes in 142 patients with IPF and in 218 controls using allele-specific PCR amplification. RESULTS: No differences in the frequency of FcgammaRIIa genotypes were evident between IPF patients and control subjects. However, significantly impaired pulmonary function at diagnosis was observed in HH compared to RR homozygotes, with evidence of more severe restriction (reduced forced vital capacity (FVC)) and lower diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO). Similarly, increased frequency of the H131 allele was observed in patients with severe disease (DLCO <40% predicted) (0.53 vs. 0.38; p=0.03). Furthermore, the H131 allele was associated with progressive pulmonary fibrosis as determined by >10% drop in FVC and/or >15% fall in DLCO at 12 months after baseline (0.48 vs. 0.33; p=0.023). CONCLUSIONS: These findings support an association between the FcgammaRIIa R131H polymorphism and IPF severity and progression, supporting the involvement of immunological mechanisms in IPF pathogenesis.
  BACKGROUND: Cystic fibrosis is a multi-system disease characterised by the production of thick secretions causing recurrent pulmonary infection, often with unusual bacteria. This leads to lung destruction and eventually death through respiratory failure. There are no antibiotics in development that exert a new mode of action and many of the current antibiotics are ineffective in eradicating the bacteria once chronic infection is established. Antibiotic adjuvants - therapies that act by rendering the organism more susceptible to attack by antibiotics or the host immune system, by rendering it less virulent or killing it by other means, are urgently needed. OBJECTIVES: To determine if antibiotic adjuvants improve clinical and microbiological outcome of pulmonary infection in people with cystic fibrosis. SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cystic Fibrosis Trials Register which is compiled from database searches, hand searches of appropriate journals and conference proceedings.Date of most recent search: 26 August 2010.We also searched MEDLINE (all years) on 21 July 2010. SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised controlled trials and quasi-randomised controlled trials of a therapy exerting an antibiotic adjuvant mechanism of action compared to placebo or no therapy for people with cystic fibrosis. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: The authors independently assessed and extracted data from identified studies. MAIN RESULTS: We identified eighteen studies of which three are included that examined antibiotic adjuvant therapies, five studies are ongoing. The included studies involve the assessment of β-carotene, garlic and zinc supplementation. No therapy demonstrated a significant effect upon pulmonary function, pulmonary exacerbations or quality of life. The study of zinc supplementation reports a reduction in the requirement of oral antibiotics but not of intravenous antibiotics, an effect that is difficult to understand.  AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: We could not identify an antibiotic adjuvant therapy that could be recommended for the treatment of lung infection in those with cystic fibrosis. The emergence of increasingly resistant bacteria makes the reliance on antibiotics alone challenging for cystic fibrosis teams. There is a need to explore alternative strategies, such as the use of adjuvant therapies. Further research is required to provide future therapeutic options.
  Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a common life-threatening autosomal recessive disorder in the Caucasian population, and the gene responsible is the CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). Patients with CF have repeated bacterial infection of the airways caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA), which is one of the predominant pathogen, and endobronchial chronic infection represents a major cause of morbidity and mortality. Pentraxin 3 (PTX3) is a gene that encodes the antimicrobial protein, PTX3, which is believed to have an important role in innate immunity of lung. To address the role of PTX3 in the risk of PA lung colonization, we investigated five single nucleotide polymorphisms of PTX3 gene in 172 Caucasian CF patients who were homozygous for the F508del mutation. We observed that PTX3 haplotype frequencies were significantly different between patients with PA colonization, as compared with noncolonized patients. Moreover, a protective effect was found in association with a specific haplotype (odds ratio 0.524). Our data suggest that variations within PTX3 affect lung colonization of Pseudomonas in patients with CF.Genes and Immunity advance online publication, 7 October 2010; doi:10.1038/gene.2010.41.
  Various anti-inflammatory agents have been used to treat acute or chronic lung injury-induced pulmonary fibrosis. However, the efficacy of the currently available treatments is disappointing and new therapies are urgently needed. In the current study, we investigated the effect of a novel α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (α-MSH) analogue, STY39, on bleomycin-induced pulmonary inflammation and fibrosis in mice. C57BL/6 mice received an intratracheal injection of bleomycin prior to being treated with STY39 (0.625, 1.25 or 2.5 mg/kg, i.p.) once a day for 14 consecutive days. Various parameters, reflecting the inflammatory reaction, metabolism of extracellular matrix, myofibroblast proliferation and degree of fibrosis in the lung, were evaluated. We found that STY39 significantly improved the survival of mice with lethal bleomycin-induced lung injury, limited body weight loss and the increase in the lung index, reduced the mRNA expression of Type I and type? procollagen and the production of hydroxyproline in the lung, diminished myofibroblast proliferation, and ultimately reduced bleomycin-induced lung damage. Further investigation revealed that, in a dose-dependent manner, STY39 treatment inhibited leukocyte migration into the lung, reduced the production of TNF-α, IL-6, macrophage-inflammatory protein-2 (MIP-2) and TGF-β1 in the lung, and altered the ratio of MMP-1 to TIMP-1. These findings suggest that STY39 attenuates bleomycin-induced experimental pulmonary fibrosis by limiting the inflammatory reaction through the inhibition of pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrosis cytokines, and by accelerating the metabolism of extracellular matrix. Therefore, STY39 may be an effective therapy for preventing pulmonary fibrosis.
  BACKGROUND: Malnutrition is an indicator of a poor prognosis in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). Previous body-composition (BC) studies in children with CF used 2-component models (2CMs) to assess fat mass (FM) and fat-free mass (FFM), but to our knowledge no study has used the gold-standard 4-component model (4CM), which allows for a more accurate evaluation of the nature of both elements. OBJECTIVE: We measured BC by using the 4CM in 6-12-y-old children with CF 1) to compare findings with those of healthy, matched control children and reference data; 2) to relate BC to lung spirometry [forced expired volume in 1 s (FEV(1))]; and 3) to compare findings with those from more commonly used 2CM techniques. DESIGN: One hundred clinically stable children with CF (57% girls) aged 6-12 y were measured by using the 4CM. Children with CF underwent spirometry (FEV(1)). RESULTS: Girls with CF had significantly less FM than did healthy girls, even after adjustment for height and pubertal status; boys with CF had higher body mass index SD scores than did healthy boys. FM in girls was positively associated with the FEV(1) percentage predicted. The 2CM FM was significantly different from the 4CM FM, with differences dependent on sex and condition, although most techniques identified a relation between FM and FEV(1) in girls. Conclusions: Although shorter than healthy children, boys with CF were heavier and had a BC within the normal range; however, girls with CF had lower FM than did healthy girls, and this was associated with poorer lung function. Given the worse prognosis in girls, this finding merits more attention. The reliability of 2CM techniques varied with sex and health status.
  BACKGROUND: Pulmonary sarcoidosis shows a remarkable heterogeneity of phenotypes ranging from bihilar lymphadenopathy to progressive fibrosis. Individual disease assessment is demanding and requires sensible, practical measures. We tested whether gas exchange measurements during exercise reflects disease activity and clinical course in sarcoidosis. METHODS: In 149 patients with proven pulmonary sarcoidosis the alveolar-arterial oxygen pressure gradient (P(A-a)O(2)) during exercise was assessed and compared with chest X-ray typing, pulmonary function, single breath-diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DL(CO)), serological markers, cell composition of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and clinical course. Patients were categorized according to thresholds of P(A-a)O(2) during exercise. MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Chest X-ray typing, pulmonary function, DL(CO) and the need for immunosuppressive treatment differed between the disease categories based on P(A-a)O(2) during exercise (p < 0.0001 each). Patients with an impairment of gas exchange during exercise also showed elevated levels of neopterin (p = 0.002) and higher percentages of neutrophils (p = 0.013) and eosinophils (p < 0.0001) in BALF. Multivariate regression analysis showed that forced vital capacity (FVC) (p = 0.009) and P(A-a)O(2) during exercise (p < 0.0001) were independently associated with a prolonged need for immunosuppressive treatment (>1 year), but not DL(CO). About 50% (n = 75) of the study population showed a normal spirometry. Even in this subgroup 23% had an impaired gas exchange during exercise, which correlated with chest X-ray types (p < 0.0001) and the need for immunosuppressive treatment (p < 0.005). CONCLUSIONS: Impaired gas exchange during exercise reflects disease activity and its extent and is associated with a prolonged need for immunosuppressive treatment during follow-up in patients with pulmonary sarcoidosis.
  BACKGROUND: Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is a life-shortening genetic disease in which ~80% of deaths result from loss of lung function linked to inflammation due to chronic bacterial infection (principally Pseudomonas aeruginosa). Pulmonary exacerbations (intermittent episodes during which symptoms of lung infection increase and lung function decreases) can cause substantial resource utilization, morbidity, and irreversible loss of lung function. Intravenous antibiotic treatment to reduce exacerbation symptoms is standard management practice. However, no prospective studies have identified an optimal antibiotic treatment duration and this lack of objective data has been identified as an area of concern and interest. METHODS: We have retrospectively analyzed pulmonary function response data (as forced expiratory volume in one second; FEV1) from a previous blinded controlled CF exacerbation management study of intravenous ceftazidime/tobramycin and meropenem/tobramycin in which spirometry was conducted daily to assess the time course of pulmonary function response. RESULTS: Ninety-five patients in the study received antibiotics for at least 4 days and were included in our analyses. Patients received antibiotics for an average of 12.6 days (median = 13, SD = 3.2 days), with a range of 4 to 27 days. No significant differences were observed in mean or median treatment durations as functions of either treatment group or baseline lung disease stage. Average time from initiation of antibiotic treatment to highest observed FEV1 was 8.7 days (median = 10, SD = 4.0 days), with a range of zero to 19 days. Patients were treated an average of 3.9 days beyond the day of peak FEV1 (median = 3, SD = 3.8 days), with 89 patients (93.7%) experiencing their peak FEV1 improvement within 13 days. There were no differences in mean or median times to peak FEV1 as a function of treatment group, although the magnitude of FEV1 improvement differed between groups. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that antibiotic response to exacerbation as assessed by pulmonary function is essentially complete within 2 weeks of treatment initiation and relatively independent of the magnitude of pulmonary function response observed.
  The development of novel engineered nano-sized materials is a rapidly emerging technology with many applications in medicine and industry. In vitro and in vivo studies have suggested many deleterious effects of carbon nanotube exposure including granulomatous inflammation, release of cytosolic enzymes, pulmonary fibrosis, reactive oxygen damage, cellular atypia, DNA fragmentation, mutation and errors in chromosome number as well as mitotic spindle disruption. The physical properties of the carbon nanotubes make respiratory exposure to workers likely during the production or use of commercial products. Many of the investigations of the genotoxicity of carbon nanotubes have focused on reactive oxygen mediated DNA damage; however, the long thin tubular-shaped carbon nanotubes have a striking similarity to cellular microtubules. The similarity of carbon nanotubes to microtubules suggests a potential to interact with cellular biomolecules, such as the mitotic spindle, as well as the motor proteins that separate the chromosomes during cell division. Disruption of centrosomes and mitotic spindles would result in monopolar, tripolar, and quadrapolar divisions of chromosomes. The resulting aneuploidy is a key mechanism in the potential carcinogenicity of carbon nanotubes.
  Abstract The use of cerium compounds as diesel fuel catalyst results in the emission of cerium oxide nanoparticles (CeO<inf>2</inf>) in the exhaust. This study characterized the potential effects of CeO<inf>2</inf> exposure on lung toxicity. Male Sprague Dawley rats were exposed to CeO<inf>2</inf> by a single intratracheal instillation at 0.15, 0.5, 1, 3.5 or 7 mg/kg body weight. At 1 day after exposure, CeO<inf>2</inf> significantly reduced NO production, but increased IL-12 production, by alveolar macrophages (AM) in response to ex vivo lipopolysacchride (LPS) challenge, and caused AM apoptosis, through activation of caspases 9 and 3. CeO<inf>2</inf> exposure markedly increased suppressor of cytokine signaling-1 at 1-day and elevated arginase-1 at 28-day post exposure in lung cells, while osteopontin was significantly elevated in lung tissue at both time points. CeO<inf>2</inf> induced inflammation, cytotoxicity, air/blood barrier damage, and phospholipidosis with enlarged AM. Thus, CeO<inf>2</inf> induced lung inflammation and injury in lungs which may lead to fibrosis.
  Antineoplastic agents induce the production of free radicals and other reactive oxygen species (ROS) in biological systems. Cytotoxic effects of antineoplastic drugs depend on rapid proliferation of cancer cells. Oxidative stress occurring during chemotherapy may potentially interfere with these effects through reducing the rate of cell proliferation. ROS may also contribute to side effects that occur with chemotherapeutic agents such as doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity, cisplatin-induced nephrotoxicity, and bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis. Lycopene is a major carotenoid present in tomatoes, and it is a potent antioxidant that may provide protection against cellular damage caused by ROS. Lycopene may reduce or prevent the side effects of chemotherapy due to its antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties. This review focuses on the protective effects of lycopene against antineoplastic agent induced toxicity.
  An excess of neutrophils in the alveoli and lung interstitium has been described in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). Engagement of neutrophil Fcγ receptors with IgG complexes may contribute to the pathogenesis of IPF. The neutrophil FcγRIIIb receptor occurs in two codominantly expressed allelic variants, NA1 and NA2, which exhibit different binding affinities for IgG1 and IgG3 subclasses. The aim of this study was to investigate whether FcγRIIIb genotype is associated with IPF susceptibility or disease progression. In a case-control study we compared the distribution of FcγRIIIb NA1/2 polymorphisms in 142 patients with IPF and in 218 controls using allele-specific PCR amplification. Significant skewing in the distribution of FcγRIIIb genotypes was observed between patients with IPF and control subjects. In the IPF cohort, there was higher frequency of the NA1/NA1 genotype (0.19 vs. 0.07), and lower NA2/NA2 frequency (0.31 vs. 0.50; χ(2) = 17.71, df = 2, P < 0.001). The overall frequency of the NA1 allele was increased in IPF patients compared to controls (0.44 vs. 0.29; P < 0.0001, odds ratio [OR] = 1.93, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.42-2.64). Heterozygotes and homozygotes of the NA1 allele were at higher risk of developing IPF (OR = 2.19, 95% CI = 1.40-3.41, P = 0.0005), whereas the NA2 allele was protective against IPF (OR = 0.34, 95% CI = 0.17-0.65, P = 0.0014). There was no association of FcγRIIIb genotype with disease progression as assessed by serial lung function measurements. FcγRIIIb NA1/2 polymorphisms are associated with IPF disease susceptibility. These results support a role for immunological mechanisms contributing to IPF pathogenesis.
  OBJECTIVE: To test observer agreement and two strategies for possible improvement (consensus meeting and reference images) for the modified Chrispin-Norman score for children with cystic fibrosis (CF). METHODS: Before and after a consensus meeting and after developing reference images three observers scored sets of 25 chest radiographs from children with CF. Observer agreement was tested for line, ring, mottled and large soft shadows, for overinflation and for the composite modified Chrispin-Norman score. Correlation with lung function was assessed. RESULTS: Before the consensus meeting agreement between observers 1 and 2 was moderate-good, but with observer 3 agreement was poor-fair. Scores correlated significantly with spirometry for observers 1 and 2 (-0.72<R<-0.42, P < 0.05), but not for observer 3. Agreement with observer 3 improved after the consensus meeting. Reference images improved agreement for overinflation and mottled and large shadows and correlation with lung function, but agreement for the modified Chrispin-Norman score did not improve further. CONCLUSION: Consensus meetings and reference images improve among-observer agreement for the modified Chrispin-Norman score, but good agreement was not achieved among all observers for the modified Chrispin-Norman score and for bronchial line and ring shadows.
  The management of persistent air leaks (PALs) is one of the most common problems in general thoracic surgery, especially after elective pulmonary resections. The statistically most frequent air leak is caused by alveolar-pleural fistula (APF), which is defined as a link between the pulmonary parenchyma distal to a segmental bronchus, and the pleural space. Prolonged air leaks result in an increase in patient's hospital length of stay with possible infectious complications, aside from an overall hospitalization cost increase. The ability to discharge a patient who would otherwise depend on continuous aspiration, because chronic PALs represent a very important clinical and technological improvement. We describe the case of a patient with chronic PALs and pneumothorax due to pulmonary fibrosis secondary to rheumatoid arthritis, with diffuse pulmonary nodules, in which surgical attempts to manage air leaks were ineffective. He was successfully home-assisted with a new chest drainage system with automatic constant negative suction pressure.
  Hemoglobinopathies are diseases caused by genetic mutations that result in abnormal, dysfunctional hemoglobin molecules or lower levels of normal hemoglobin molecules. The most common hemoglobinopathies are sickle cell disease (SCD) and the thalassemias. In SCD, an abnormal hemoglobin alters the erythrocyte, causing a chronic hemolytic anemia, which can lead to pulmonary parenchymal damage and impaired vascular function. Pulmonary complications of SCD include the acute chest syndrome (ACS), reactive airways disease, pulmonary hypertension (PH), and pulmonary fibrosis. Episodes of ACS and the development of PH both increase the risk of death in patients with SCD. Both α and β thalassemia are characterized by impaired production of hemoglobin subunits, and severity of disease varies widely. Although screening studies suggest that PH is a common complication for patients with thalassemia, its impact on survival is unknown. Understanding the pathogenesis, diagnostic options, and prevention and treatment strategies for such complications is critical for clinicians who care for these patients. In this review, we discuss the mechanisms and clinical presentation of pulmonary complications associated with hemoglobinopathies, with a focus on recent advances in pathogenesis and treatment.
  End stage pulmonary emphysema is the most common indication for lung transplantation worldwide. The shortness of donor organs and the better natural prognosis compared to other diseases leading to transplantation such as pulmonary fibrosis and cystic fibrosis demands careful patient selection.Lung transplantation is considered in patients with declining lung function after receiving all conservative treatment options including smoking cessation and rehabilitation programmes. Preoperative evaluation using consensus criteria needs to be performed by a multidisciplinary team in specialized centres. Assessment of co-morbidities is crucial, as they may significantly increase transplant-related mortality. The largest survival advantage from lung transplantation has been shown for the subgroup of patients below 60 years of age presenting with end-stage obstructive lung disease (FEV1 < 20% predicted) and respiratory failure. Similarly, high risk patients with secondary pulmonary hypertension or cachexia (BMI < 20) will likely benefit from transplantation.The 5-year-survival rate averages 60 percent, with superior outcome following double versus single lung transplantation. A clear survival benefit can only be achieved in a subgroup of patients, whereas the impact on quality of life seems to be even more important in patients suffering from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
  OBJECTIVE: To increase clinician adherence to prescribing guidelines for pulmonary medications in children with cystic fibrosis (CF). DESIGN: Quality improvement project with multiple time series design. SETTING: The CF center at a tertiary care pediatric hospital in the United States. PATIENTS: Children with CF who were eligible to receive oral azithromycin, nebulized dornase alfa, or inhaled tobramycin sulfate based on prescribing guidelines for CF lung disease. INTERVENTION: Evidence-based prescribing guidelines were designed by a local committee to reflect consensus recommendations from the CF Foundation. Clinicians and families were educated about guidelines. Adherence to prescribing guidelines was tracked using a local CF database and record reviews. Weekly meetings were used to highlight adherence failures and promote clinician accountability. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: The rate of clinician adherence to prescribing guidelines. RESULTS: One hundred seventy patients with CF were included. At the start of the project, the rate of clinician adherence to prescribing guidelines was 62%. After 3 months of the project, the rate of clinician adherence to prescribing guidelines was 87% (odds ratio = 4.6; 95% confidence interval, 3.0-7.0). The improvements in adherence to prescribing guidelines were sustained for 21 months of follow-up. CONCLUSIONS: Educating clinicians about prescribing guidelines, sharing guidelines with families, and monitoring clinician adherence improve prescribing adherence to evidence-based recommendations.
  Context: Recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH) improves growth in patients with growth hormone deficiency or idiopathic short stature. Its role in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) is unclear. Objective: To review the effectiveness of rhGH in the treatment of patients with CF. Methods: Medline and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials were searched from the earliest date through April 2010. Randomized controlled trials, observational studies, systematic reviews/meta-analyses, or case reports were included if rhGH therapy was administered to patients with CF and data on prespecified harms, intermediate outcomes, or final health outcomes were reported. When applicable, end points were pooled by using a random-effects model. The overall body of evidence was graded for each outcome as insufficient, low, moderate, or high. Results: Ten unique controlled trials (n = 312) and 8 observational studies (n = 58) were included. On quantitative synthesis of controlled trials, several markers of pulmonary function, anthropometrics, and bone mineralization were significantly improved versus control. Results of single-arm observational studies for the aforementioned outcomes were generally supportive of findings in clinical trials. There is insufficient evidence to determine the effect of rhGH on intravenous antibiotic use during therapy, pulmonary exacerbations, health-related quality-of-life, bone consequences, or total mortality, but moderate evidence suggests that rhGH therapy reduces the rate of hospitalization versus control. Conclusions: rhGH improved almost all intermediate measures of pulmonary function, height, and weight in patients with CF. Improvements in bone mineral content are also promising. However, with the exception of hospitalizations, the benefits on final health outcomes cannot be directly determined at this time.
  BACKGROUND: Once daily dosing of aminoglycosides is widely used but is limited by the inconvenience of the slow infusion it requires and is associated by three-times daily infusion of a beta-lactam. Twice daily tobramycin can be given as a slow IV bolus and may be more convenient. This study compares twice with three-times daily dosing of both tobramycin and ceftazidime. METHODS: This was a randomised, open-label, parallel group trial. CF patients presenting with an infective exacerbation were randomised to either twice or three-times daily ceftazidime and tobramycin. Markers of treatment efficacy and safety were measured in the two groups. The primary outcome measure was an improvement in FEV1. RESULTS: 146 patients were randomised into the study. There was no significant difference in the two groups for improvement in FEV1% predicted (9.93% and 7.98% for twice daily and three-times daily respectively) and similar times to next exacerbation. There were no differences in the incidence of treatment failure, nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity. DISCUSSION: This study confirms that twice daily dosing of both tobramycin and ceftazidime is safe and effective and may be considered more convenient than current dosing schedules.
  Pulmonary fibrosis associated with amyopathic dermatomyositis (ADM) is known to have a generally aggressive course and is ultimately fatal. We report the case of a 50-year-old patient with ADM, who developed progressive interstitial pneumonia that was unresponsive to corticosteroids and multiple immunosuppressive agents, including cyclosporine and tacrolimus hydrate. Five courses of lecithinized superoxide dismutase (PC-SOD) were administered without adverse effects. Improvements in physiological parameters, such as pulmonary function and exercise tolerance, as well as the serum Krebs von den Lungen 6 (KL-6) level, were observed. This is the first report of a case of steroid-refractory interstitial pneumonia treated with PC-SOD.
  Cystic fibrosis related diabetes (CFRD) is the most common co-morbidity in persons with cystic fibrosis (CF). As the life expectancy of persons with CF continues to increase, the need to proactively diagnose and aggressively treat CFRD and its potential complications has become more apparent. CFRD negatively impacts lung function, growth and mortality, making its diagnosis and management crucial in a population already at high risk for early mortality. Compared to type 1 and type 2 diabetes, CFRD is a unique entity, requiring a thorough understanding of its unique pathophysiology to facilitate the creation and utilization of an effective medical treatment plan. The physiology of CFRD is complex, likely consisting of a combination of insulin deficiency, insulin resistance and a genetic predisposition towards the development of diabetes. However, the hallmark of CFRD is insulin deficiency, necessitating the use of exogenous insulin as the mainstay of therapy. Insulin administration, in combination with a multidisciplinary team of health professionals with expertise in the care of patients with CF and CFRD, is the cornerstone of the care for these patients. The goals of treatment of the CFRD population are to reverse protein catabolism, maintain a healthy weight, and reduce acute and chronic diabetes complications. Creating a partnership between the treatment team and the patient is the ideal way to accomplish these goals and is essential for successful diabetes care.
  Objectives: To describe the findings of cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) associated with connective tissue disease (CTD) and in consecutive patients with systemic sclerosis (SSc) without PAH. Methods: The study comprised nine consecutive patients who were admitted for right heart catheterization (RHC) under a suspicion of CTD-PAH and 25 consecutive patients who were admitted for evaluation because of a clinical suspicion of SSc. In addition to the regular assessment, they also underwent examination by CMR. Results: CMR measurements of right ventricular (RV) volumes and function showed severe pathology in patients with CTD-PAH. Patients with SSc without PAH had similar but much less severe findings. Right ventricular end-diastolic volume (RVEDV) and right ventricular ejection fraction (RVEF) were abnormal in all patients with CTD-PAH. In eight out of nine patients with CTD-PAH, fibrosis was seen in the RV insertion point, probably caused by increased tension, but only in one of the consecutive SSc patients. This patient was diagnosed with CTD-PAH 20 months later. Conclusions: In CTD-PAH, CMR shows severe changes in RV volumes and function, but also fibrosis in the RV insertion point. Similar abnormalities, although much less severe, may be seen at diagnosis of SSc. Further evaluation is warranted to determine whether these findings are of value in screening for early signs of PAH in SSc.
  This article reviews the latest findings on how extracellular signaling controls cell fate determination during the process of biofilm formation by Bacillus subtilis in the artificial setting of the laboratory. To complement molecular genetic approaches, surface-associated communities in settings as diverse as the pitcher plant Sarracenia purpurea and the human lung were investigated. The study of the pitcher plant revealed that the presence or absence of a mosquito larva in the pitcher plant controlled bacterial diversity in the ecosystem inside the pitcher plant. Through the analysis of the respiratory tract microbiota of humans suffering from cystic fibrosis (CF) a correlation between lung function and bacterial community diversity was found. Those that had lungs in good condition had also more diverse communities, whereas patients harboring Pseudomonas aeruginosa-the predominant CF pathogen-in their lungs had less diverse communities. Further studies focused on interspecies and intraspecies relationships at the molecular level in search for signaling molecules that would promote biofilm formation. Two molecules were found that induced biofilm formation in B. subtilis: nystatin-released by other species-and surfactin-released by B. subtilis itself. This is a role not previously known for two molecules that were known for other activities-nystatin as an antifungal and surfactin as a surfactant. In addition, surfactin was found to also trigger cannibalism under starvation. This could be a strategy to maintain the population because the cells destroyed serve as nutrients for the rest. The path that led the author to the study of microbial biofilms is also described.
  Cyclophilin D (which is encoded by the Ppif gene) is a mitochondrial matrix peptidyl-prolyl isomerase known to modulate opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (MPTP). Apart from regulating necrotic cell death, the physiologic function of the MPTP is largely unknown. Here we have shown that Ppif(-/-) mice exhibit substantially greater cardiac hypertrophy, fibrosis, and reduction in myocardial function in response to pressure overload stimulation than control mice. In addition, Ppif(-/-) mice showed greater hypertrophy and lung edema as well as reduced survival in response to sustained exercise stimulation. Cardiomyocyte-specific transgene expression of cyclophilin D in Ppif(-/-) mice rescued the enhanced hypertrophy, reduction in cardiac function, and rapid onset of heart failure following pressure overload stimulation. Mechanistically, the maladaptive phenotype in the hearts of Ppif(-/-) mice was associated with an alteration in MPTP-mediated Ca(2+) efflux resulting in elevated levels of mitochondrial matrix Ca(2+) and enhanced activation of Ca(2+)-dependent dehydrogenases. Elevated matrix Ca(2+) led to increased glucose oxidation relative to fatty acids, thereby limiting the metabolic flexibility of the heart that is critically involved in compensation during stress. These findings suggest that the MPTP maintains homeostatic mitochondrial Ca(2+) levels to match metabolism with alterations in myocardial workload, thereby suggesting a physiologic function for the MPTP.
  RATIONALE: Stenotrophomonas maltophilia is one of the more common multi-drug resistant organisms isolated from the respiratory tract of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients but the effect of chronic S. maltophilia infection on CF lung disease is unknown. OBJECTIVE: To determine the impact of chronic S. maltophilia infection on lung disease in CF. METHODS: We developed a serologic assay specific for S. maltophilia and in a cross-sectional study, measured serum antibodies to S. maltophilia in CF patients to determine if a definition of chronic S. maltophilia isolation based on culture results corresponded to an immunologic response (serologic study). We then used this validated definition to examine the effect of chronic S. maltophilia on the severity of lung disease in a retrospective cohort study using the Toronto CF Database from 1997-2008 (cohort study). MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Serum antibody levels to S. maltophilia were measured in 179 CF patients. Patients with chronic S. maltophilia had significantly higher mean antibody levels to S. maltophilia flagellin (p<0.0001) and whole cell (p=0.0004) compared to patients with intermittent or no S. maltophilia. The cohort study included 692 patients with an average follow-up of 8.3 years. In an adjusted log linear model, patients with chronic S. maltophilia infection had a significantly increased risk of pulmonary exacerbation requiring hospitalization and antibiotics compared to patients who had never had S. maltophilia (RR=1.63, p=0.0002). CONCLUSIONS: Chronic S. maltophilia infection in CF patients is associated with a specific immune response to this organism and is an independent risk factor for pulmonary exacerbations.
  Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a devastating lung disease that is characterized by excessive proliferation of fibroblasts. The lipid mediator prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) has the capacity to limit fibrosis through its inhibition of numerous functions of these fibroblasts; however, in the setting of fibrosis, fibroblasts have been shown to be resistant to PGE2. We have linked such resistance to decreased expression levels of the E prostanoid 2 (EP2) receptor. In this study, in fibroblasts from both mice and humans with pulmonary fibrosis, we show that DNA hypermethylation is responsible for diminished EP2 expression levels and PGE2 resistance. Bisulfite sequencing of the prostaglandin E receptor 2 gene (PTGER2) promoter revealed that fibrotic fibroblasts exhibit greater PTGER2 methylation than nonfibrotic control cells. Treatment with the DNA methylation inhibitors 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and zebularine as well as DNA methyltransferase-specific siRNA decreased PTGER2 methylation, increased EP2 mRNA and protein expression levels, and restored PGE2 responsiveness in fibrotic fibroblasts but not in nonfibrotic controls. PTGER2 promoter hypermethylation was driven by an increase in Akt signal transduction. In addition to results described for the PTGER2 promoter, fibrotic fibroblasts also exhibited increased global DNA methylation. These findings demonstrate that the down-regulation of PTGER2 and consequent PGE2 resistance are both mediated by DNA hypermethylation; we identified increased Akt signal transduction as a novel mechanism that promotes DNA hypermethylation during fibrogenesis.
  Substance P (SP) and the neurokinin-1 receptor (NK-1R) are involved in the development of colitis and mucosal healing after colonic inflammation. We studied whether SP modulates colonic fibrosis by using a chronic model of trinitrobenzenesulfonic acid (TNBS)-induced colitis in wild-type (WT) and NK-1R-deficient (NK-1R KD) mice. We found increased mRNA expression levels of collagen, vimentin, and the fibrogenic factors transforming growth factor β1 and insulin-like growth factor 1 in the chronically inflamed colons of WT mice treated with repeated intracolonic TNBS administrations. Fibrosis in TNBS-treated mice was also evident immunohistochemically by collagen deposition in the colon. Treatment of TNBS-exposed WT mice with the NK-1R antagonist CJ-12255 reduced colonic inflammation, colonic fibrosis, fibroblast accumulation, and expression levels of the fibrogenic factors. NK-1R knockout mice chronically exposed to TNBS had similar colonic inflammation compared with WT, but reduced colonic fibrosis, fibroblast accumulation, and expression levels of fibrogenic factors. Immunohistochemical staining also showed co-localization of NK-1R with fibroblasts in inflamed colons of mice and in colonic mucosa of patients with Crohn's disease. Exposure of human colonic CCD-18Co fibroblasts to SP (10 nmol/L) increased cell migration. SP stimulated collagen synthesis in CCD-18Co fibroblasts in the presence of transforming growth factor β1 and insulin-like growth factor 1, and this effect was reduced by Akt inhibition. Thus, SP, via NK-1R, promotes intestinal fibrogenesis after chronic colitis by stimulating fibrotic responses in fibroblasts.
  Hypoxia-induced mitogenic factor (HIMF), also known as found in inflammatory zone 1 and resistin-like molecule α, belongs to a novel class of cysteine-rich secreted proteins. It exhibits mitogenic and chemotactic properties during pulmonary hypertension-associated vascular remodeling, as well as fibrogenic properties during pulmonary fibrosis. HIMF expression in the lung was reported to be regulated by Th2 cytokines (IL-4 and IL-13) via the transcription factor STAT6 pathway in a bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis model. However, in this study, we found that in the hypoxia-induced pulmonary hypertension model, lung HIMF expression is increased in IL-4 and STAT6 knockout (KO) mice to the same degree as in wild-type (WT) mice, suggesting that induction of HIMF expression does not require Th2 regulation in this model. We also found that HIMF-induced proliferative activity, hypertrophy, collagen, and extracellular matrix deposition in the pulmonary arteries are significantly less in IL-4 KO mice than in WT mice. In addition, HIMF-induced production of angiogenic factors/chemokines, such as vascular endothelial growth factor, MCP-1, and stromal-derived factor-1, in the lung resident cells, as well as macrophage infiltration, were significantly suppressed in the lungs of IL-4 KO mice. We also show that IL-4 was significantly increased in the lungs of HIMF-treated WT mice. Our in vitro studies using pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells revealed that HIMF stimulated cell proliferation, vascular endothelial growth factor expression, and MCP-1 production in a manner that is dependent on the IL-4/IL-4Rα system. These findings suggest that IL-4 signaling may play a significant role in HIMF-induced lung inflammation and vascular remodeling.
  Pulmonary disease is the most important cause of morbidity and mortality in cystic fibrosis (CF). Most patients with CF die from respiratory failure with extensive airway destruction. Airway remodelling, defined as structural airway wall changes, begins early in life in CF but the sequence of remodelling events in the disease process is poorly understood. Airway remodelling in CF has traditionally been thought to be solely the consequence of repeated cycles of inflammation and infection. However, new evidence obtained from developmental, physiological and histopathological studies suggests that there might instead be multiple mechanisms leading to airway remodelling in CF including (1) changes related to infection and inflammation; (2) changes specific to CF as a result of CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) dysfunction in the airway wall, independent of infection and inflammation; and (3) protective responses to (1) and/or (2). Recent advances in bronchoscopic techniques have allowed airway mucosal (endobronchial) biopsies to be taken in children and even infants. Endobronchial biopsy studies may provide insight into the role and relative contribution of the different mechanisms of airway remodelling in CF, with the main limitation that they assess only changes in proximal large airways and not in peripheral small airways from where CF disease is thought to originate. Findings from biopsy studies could encourage the development of novel therapeutic strategies targeting structural changes in addition to infection and inflammation.
  BACKGROUND:: Lung transplantation is the recognized therapy for end-stage respiratory failure. Many serious medical complications have been described occurring from months to years after lung transplantation, often necessitating admission to an intensive care unit (ICU). We examined the factors associated with death. METHODS:: All consecutive lung transplant recipients who were readmitted to the ICU > 30 days after transplantation from 2000 to 2009 were included in this retrospective study. Data were collected regarding demographic parameters, ICU stay, and outcome. RESULTS:: During the study period, 40 patients were admitted to the ICU. The main pre-transplant diagnosis was idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, followed by chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Most patients (93%) required mechanical ventilation during their ICU stay. The main reason for ICU admission was septic shock in 22 patients (55%). An organism was isolated from 19 of these patients; in 11 patients, the organism was multidrug resistant. The ICU mortality was 62.5%. Non-survivors were characterized by more frequent readmissions to hospital (p = 0.02), a higher admission Sequential Organ Failure Assessment score (p = 0.02), an admission diagnosis of sepsis (87.5% vs 37.5% for all other diagnoses, p < 0.001), and a requirement for mechanical ventilation (p = 0.02). The incidence of bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome was also significantly higher in non-survivors (p = 0.02). CONCLUSIONS:: Severe sepsis remains the most important factor associated with a poor outcome after readmission to ICU. New strategies are required to alter the course of this common complication of lung transplantation.
  BACKGROUND: The chitinase-like protein YKL-40 is a serum biomarker in diseases with fibrosis, inflammation and tissue remodelling. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a progressive interstitial lung disease that is hallmarked by these processes. The aim of this study was to investigate the potential of YKL-40 as a prognostic biomarker for survival in IPF patients. METHODS: Serum and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) levels of YKL-40 at the time of diagnosis and a promoter polymorphism in CHI3L1, the gene encoding YKL-40, were determined in 85 IPF patients and 126 controls. The relationship between YKL-40 levels and clinical parameters was evaluated. Kaplan-Meier and Cox regression analyses were used to examine the association between YKL-40 levels and survival. RESULTS: Serum and BALF YKL-40 levels were significantly higher in patients than in healthy controls (p < 0.001). The - 329 A/G polymorphism had a significant influence on BALF YKL-40 levels and the influence on serum YKL-40 levels showed a trend towards significance in IPF patients. IPF patients with high (> 79 ng/ml) serum or high BALF YKL-40 (> 17 ng/ml) levels had significantly shorter survival than those with low YKL-40 levels in serum or BALF. In patients with both low serum and low BALF YKL-40 levels no IPF related mortality was observed. Cox regression modelling showed that there were no confounding factors. CONCLUSIONS: The - 329 polymorphism was associated with serum and BALF YKL-40 levels in IPF patients. High serum and BALF YKL-40 levels are associated with poor survival in IPF patients and could be useful prognostic markers for survival in IPF.
  BACKGROUND: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is characterised by impaired mucociliary clearance (MCC), chronic inflammation and infection, and progressively deteriorating lung function. Inhaled mannitol (Bronchitol) has been shown to increase MCC and cough clearance and FEV(1) in CF patients, contributing to better lung hygiene and consequently a slower decline in lung function. This study was designed to determine the dose relationship of mannitol treatment and improvement in FEV(1) and FVC as well as safety. METHODS: This was a randomised, open-label, crossover, dose response study. Following a 2-week treatment with mannitol 400mg b.i.d., 48 CF patients with a mean (SD) FEV(1) % predicted of 64 (13.2), received a further 3 treatments with 40mg, 120mg or 240mg b.i.d. for 2weeks each, in random order. RESULTS: The study demonstrated a dose dependent increase in FEV(1) and FVC. The 400mg dose showed the greatest improvement and the 40mg dose had no discernible effect. The mean percent change in FEV(1) was -1.57%, 3.61%, 3.87% and 8.75% respectively for the 40mg, 120mg, 240mg and 400mg treatments. There was a statistically significant change in FEV(1) for 400mg compared to 40mg (p<0.0001) but the difference with 120mg and 240mg did not reach significance. The mean % change in FVC was -0.90, 1.74, 3.07 and 8.14, for the 40mg, 120mg, 240mg and 400mg treatment arms, with p=0.0001, p=0.0037 and p=0.0304 respectively when compared to 400mg. The highest tested dose of 400mg had a similar safety profile to the other doses tested. The change in FEV(1) and FVC by dose in the paediatric age group (<18years) was similar to the results in the adult population. CONCLUSION: Based on these results the 400mg b.i.d. dose has been further studied in phase III trials.
  BACKGROUND:: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an inherited condition that causes progressive respiratory failure and is the third most common indication for adult bilateral lung transplantation. Post-transplant hyperlipidemia commonly affects lung transplant recipients, but the impact of lung transplantation on serum lipids in the adult CF population is not well studied. The aim of this study was to examine the impact of lung transplantation on the prevalence of hyperlipidemia in CF adults. METHODS:: We retrospectively analyzed prospectively collected data in 108 CF adults undergoing bilateral sequential lung transplantation from 1996 to 2007 at our institution. RESULTS:: The prevalence of hypercholesterolemia (>5.2 mmol/liter) and hypertriglyceridemia (>2.2 mmol/liter) increased significantly after lung transplant (14.8% vs 32.4%, p = 0.002; 8.3% vs 41.7%, p < 0.0001, respectively). Cyclosporine A (CsA) use was associated with significantly higher post-transplant total and LDL cholesterol compared with tacrolimus use. Post-transplant calculated Framingham risk score was <10% in all but 1 subject. CONCLUSION:: Hyperlipidemia was common in our cohort of post-lung transplant CF adults, with a higher prevalence in those receiving CsA. Despite these findings, calculated cardiovascular risk remained low and none of these subjects developed clinically evident cardiovascular disease.
  Physical activity and exercise training play an important role in the clinical management of patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). Exercise training is more common and recognized as an essential part of rehabilitation programmes and overall CF care. Regular exercise training is associated with improved aerobic and anaerobic capacity, higher pulmonary function, and enhanced airway mucus clearance. Furthermore, patients with higher aerobic fitness have an improved survival. Aerobic and anaerobic training may have different effects, while the combination of both have been reported to be beneficial in CF. However, exercise training remains underutilised and not always incorporated into routine CF management. We provide an update on aerobic and anaerobic responses to exercise and general training recommendations in children and adolescents with CF. We propose that an active lifestyle and exercise training are an efficacious part of regular CF patient management.
  Silica and asbestos cause pneumoconioses known as silicosis and asbestosis, respectively, that are each characterized by progressive pulmonary fibrosis. On the other hand, silicosis patients often suffer from a type of immunological dysregulation that gives rise to autoimmunity. These epidemiological findings suggest that silica may affect the immune system in humans. In addition, as asbestos itself is a mineral silicate, it may possess generalized immunotoxicological effects similar to those associated with silica particles. Because asbestos-exposed patients are well-known to often develop malignant diseases such as lung cancer and mesothelioma, one silica-like dysregulatory outcome that needs to be considered (apart from autoimmunity) is an alteration in host tumor immunity. In this review, the immunotoxicological effects of both silica and asbestos are presented and discussed in terms of immune system dysregulation as manifested by the onset of autoimmunity or alterations in host tumor immunity.
  Abstract BACKGROUND: Miners inhale dust at work, and are at a risk of developing coal workers' pneumoconiosis (CWP), a preventable and potentially fatal lung disease. After regulations were implemented in the 1970s, declines were reported in both dust levels and the prevalence of simple and advanced CWP until about 2001, when despite stable reported dust levels, disease levels sharply increased. METHODS: A structured retrospective chart review was performed to describe the demographics and disease progression for 138 coal miners with progressive massive fibrosis whose claims were approved by the West Virginia State Occupational Pneumoconiosis Board (Board) between January 2000 and December 2009. RESULTS: Progressive massive fibrosis (PMF), a complication of CWP, developed in 138 West Virginia coal miners at a mean age of 52.6 years after an average of 30 years work tenure. The time of progression averaged 12.2 years from the last normal chest film until PMF was detected. Lung function declined sharply in both smokers and nonsmokers, averaging 87 ml/yr, for FEV(1) and 74 ml/yr for FVC. The Board has confirmed 21 deaths in this group. The most common job activities were operating continuous mining machines (41%) and roof bolting (19%). Virtually all of these miners' dust exposures occurred after the implementation of current Federal dust regulations. CONCLUSIONS: Contemporary occupational dust exposures have resulted over the last decade in rapidly progressive pneumoconiosis and massive fibrosis in relatively young West Virginia coal miners, leading to important lung dysfunction and premature death.
  ABSTRACT BACKGROUND: The diagnostic gold standard for neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia of infancy (NEHI) is demonstration of increased numbers of neuroendocrine cells amidst otherwise near-normal lung histology. Typical clinical and radiographic features are often present. However, neuroendocrine cells are also increased after lung injury and in other disorders, which can complicate biopsy interpretation and diagnosis of suspected NEHI. Our objective was to determine whether neuroendocrine cell prominence is specific for the diagnosis of NEHI. METHODS: Bombesin immunoreactivity was quantified in lung biopsies from 13 children with characteristic clinical presentation and imaging appearance of NEHI. The primary comparison group was thirteen age-matched cases, selected from children with lung disorders known to be associated with neuroendocrine cell prominence. RESULTS: Bombesin-immunopositive epithelial area was significantly increased in NEHI compared to other diseases. Patchy bronchiolar inflammation or fibrosis was frequently observed in NEHI, with no direct association between airway histopathology and bombesin-immunopositive area. Neuroendocrine cell prominence correlated with severity of small airway obstruction demonstrated on infant pulmonary function testing. Immunohistochemical co-localization of bombesin with Ki67 did not reveal active neuroendocrine cell proliferation. There was wide intra- and inter-subject variability in neuroendocrine cell number, which did not relate to radiographic appearance of the region(s) biopsied. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that neuroendocrine cell prominence is a distinguishing feature of NEHI independent of airway injury. The extent of intra-subject variability and potential for overlap with disease controls suggest that clinical-radiologic-pathologic correlation is required for diagnosis, and that the abundance of neuroendocrine cells may not fully explain the disease pathogenesis.
  Objective. The clinical course of SSc depends on subtype, organ involvement and age. Few data are reported on patients suffering from late-onset SSc. Methods. We analysed data from 8554 patients prospectively followed in the EULAR Scleroderma Trials and Research (EUSTAR) group database. Late-onset SSc was defined as onset of non-RP disease features at or beyond 75 years of age. Disease characteristics, clinical features, disease course and mortality were evaluated. Results. A total of 123 patients with SSc onset at or beyond 75 years of age were identified. Compared with patients <75 years they had more frequently limited than diffuse SSc and a higher prevalence of anti-centromere autoantibodies. Fewer old patients had digital ulcers. The modified Rodnan's skin score, the prevalence of lung fibrosis and renal crisis did not differ significantly between groups. Pulmonary hypertension (PH) measured by echocardiography was more prevalent in the late-onset group, as well as arterial hypertension and diastolic dysfunction. Late-onset SSc remained a positive predictor for PH in multivariate analyses. No significant difference of the two groups in skin score or diffusion capacity was observed during follow-up. Mortality due to SSc was higher in the late-onset group, but the survival time from diagnosis was longer compared with the younger patients. Conclusion. Late-onset SSc shows a distinct clinical presentation and outcome. Patients with late-onset SSc suffer more frequently from the limited subtype and PH, but fewer patients have digital ulcers. PH may in part be determined by underlying cardiovascular disease.
  BACKGROUND: Reducing nebulisation times for tobramycin solution for inhalation in cystic fibrosis (CF) may improve compliance. METHODS: In this single-dose, open-label, two-way crossover study, 13 subjects (7 CF, 6 healthy) were randomised to receive tobramycin via eFlow rapid or LC Plus jet nebuliser. Drug deposition in the lung using gamma scintigraphic imaging, nebulisation times, pharmacokinetics, and safety were evaluated. RESULTS: In CF patients, whole-lung deposition was 40% less with the eFlow rapid compared with LC Plus nebulisers was (8.9±0.8%, and 15.1±6.0%, p>0.05). Nebulisation time was shorter with eFlow rapid compared to LC Plus (7.0min versus 20.0min, p<0.05). Lung deposition in healthy subjects was comparable between both devices. CONCLUSIONS: eFlow rapid reduces the nebulisation time of tobramycin and can potentially improved compliance in patients with CF.
  Radiation therapy often plays a critical role in the treatment of thymic malignancies. However, because of the location of these tumors, historically patients have been at a significant risk for radiation-related toxicity such as pericardial effusions, radiation pneumonitis, long-term pulmonary fibrosis, and occasional long-term esophageal stricture, particularly for unresectable thymoma. Recent advancements in technology have provided the treating radiation oncologist with the ability to more accurately target the region at risk while sparing normal structures. In this review, we provide an overview of key advances in radiation techniques for thymoma over the past two decades. These techniques include 3D conformal therapy, intensity-modulated radiation therapy, 4D treatment planning, adaptive radiation therapy, and proton therapy. Each advancement has brought with it unique advantages in maintaining long-term disease control while improving quality of life in this manageable disease.
  Dyskeratosis congenita (DC) is an inherited disease associated with nail dystrophy, abnormal skin pigmentation, oral leukoplakia, bone marrow failure and a predisposition to cancer. DC is a disease of defective telomere maintenance and patients with DC have very short telomeres. To date, mutations in six genes of telomerase and telomere components have been identified in patients with DC. Recently, mutations in telomerase and telomere components were also identified in patients with aplastic anemia, pulmonary fibrosis, and liver diseases who did not have mucocutaneous manifestations. These findings imply that defective telomere maintenance may cause not only classical DC but also a broad spectrum of diseases previously thought to be idiopathic, and have led to a new concept of diseases, termed "syndromes of telomere shortening". An understanding of the role of telomeres in these diseases is indispensable for diagnosis, genetic counseling and clinical management.
  Background Patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) with Pseudomonas aeruginosa lung infections produce endobronchial mucus plugs allowing growth of obligate anaerobes including Prevotella spp. Whether obligate anaerobes contribute to the pathophysiology of CF lung disease is unknown. Methods The virulence of Prevotella intermedia and Ps aeruginosa was investigated in vitro and in mice, antibodies against P intermedia in CF sera were assessed and a culture-independent detection method for P intermedia/P nigrescens in CF sputum was tested. Results P intermedia reached cell numbers of >10(5)->10(7)&emsp14;colony-forming units (CFU)/ml sputum. The majority of patients with CF (16/17; 94.1%) produced antibodies against two immunoreactive antigens of P intermedia. Culture supernatant fluids, collected from 10(9) P intermedia cells, were more cytotoxic to respiratory epithelial cells in vitro and inflammatory in mouse lungs than respective fluids from anaerobically grown Ps aeruginosa, while fluids from aerobically grown Ps aeruginosa had the highest cytotoxicity and inflammation. Both pathological effects were largely reduced when culture supernatant fluids from 10(7) cells of either species were used. P intermedia cells (∼10(6)CFU/lung) did not induce mortality in the agar beads lung infection mouse model, while Ps aeruginosa cells caused death in 30% of mice due to rapid multiplication. A P intermedia/P nigrescens-specific PNA probe was significantly more sensitive than culture-dependent diagnostic assays to detect these strict anaerobes. Conclusion Ps aeruginosa and P intermedia become significantly virulent in vitro and in vivo when cell numbers exceed 10(8) CFU/lung.
  Background In idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) the distribution and spatial-temporal progression of fibrotic changes may be influenced by general or locoregional conditions. From this perspective, patients with asymmetrical disease (AIPF) may be unique. Methods This retrospective study included 32 patients (26 men, mean±SD age 69±7&emsp14;years) with AIPF, as defined by an asymmetry ratio (most affected - least affected fibrosis score)/(most affected + least affected fibrosis score) >0.2. The global fibrosis score was the average of the right and left scores. Patients with AIPF were compared with 64 matched controls with symmetrical IPF. Results Patients with AIPF did not differ from controls in global fibrosis score and forced vital capacity, but carbon monoxide transfer factor was less decreased (52±19% vs 43±13%, p=0.009). The rate of gastro-oesophageal reflux and acute exacerbations was significantly higher in patients with AIPF (62.5% vs 31.3%, p=0.006 and 46.9% vs 17.2%, p=0.004, respectively). In patients with AIPF the right side was more likely to be involved (62.5%); the median asymmetry ratio was 0.5 (range 0.24-1). Although the global fibrosis score worsened significantly in all 23 patients with AIPF with serial high-resolution CT scans (p<0.0001), pulmonary fibrosis remained asymmetrical in all except three. During follow-up, 15 patients with AIPF experienced 18 acute exacerbations. The first episode was virtually unilateral, occurring in the most affected lung in 10 patients (66.7%). Survival was similar between patients with AIPF and controls. Conclusion AIPF may be related to locoregional factors including gastro-oesophageal reflux which may be responsible for both disease expansion and the occurrence of acute exacerbations.
  Hypermutable or mutator microorganisms are those that have an increased spontaneous mutation rate as a result of defects in DNA repair or error avoidance systems. Over the last two decades, several studies have provided strong evidence for a relevant role of mutators in the evolution of natural bacterial populations, particularly in the field of infectious diseases. Among them, chronic respiratory infection with Pseudomonas aeruginosa in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients was the first natural environment to reveal the high prevalence and important role of mutators. A remarkable positive selection of mutators during the course of the chronic infection has been reported, mainly as a result of the emergence of DNA mismatch repair system (mutS, mutL or mutU)-deficient mutants, although strains defective in the GO system (mutM, mutY and mutT) have also been observed. High frequencies of mutators have also been noted among other pathogens in the CF setting, particularly Staphylococcus aureus and Haemophilus influenzae. Enhanced antimicrobial resistance development is the most thoroughly studied consequence of mutators in CF and other chronic infections, although recent studies show that mutators may additionally have important effects on the evolution of virulence, genetic adaptation to the airways of CF patients, persistence of colonization, transmissibility, and perhaps lung function decline. Further prospective clinical studies are nevertheless still needed for an in-depth evaluation of the impact of mutators on disease progression and outcome.
  Purpose: To develop low-dose thin-section computed tomographic (CT) protocols for assessment of cystic fibrosis (CF) in pediatric patients and determine the clinical usefulness thereof compared with chest radiography. Materials and Methods: After institutional review board approval and informed consent from patients or guardians were obtained, 14 patients with CF and 11 patients without CF (16 male, nine female; mean age, 12.6 years ± 5.4 [standard deviation]; range, 3.5-25 years) who underwent imaging for clinical reasons underwent low-dose thin-section CT. Sections 1 mm thick (protocol A) were used in 10 patients, and sections 0.5 mm thick (protocol B) were used in 15 patients at six levels at 120 kVp and 30-50 mA. Image quality and diagnostic acceptability were scored qualitatively and quantitatively by two radiologists who also quantified disease severity at thin-section CT and chest radiography. Effective doses were calculated by using a CT dosimetry calculator. Results: Low-dose thin-section CT was performed with mean effective doses of 0.19 mSv ± 0.03 for protocol A and 0.14 mSv ± 0.04 for protocol B (P < .005). Diagnostic acceptability and depiction of bronchovascular structures at lung window settings were graded as almost excellent for both protocols, but protocol B was inferior to protocol A for mediastinal assessment (P < .02). Patients with CF had moderate lung disease with a mean Bhalla score of 9.2 ± 5.3 (range, 0-19), compared with that of patients without CF (1.1 ± 1.4; P < .001). There was excellent correlation between thin-section CT and chest radiography (r = 0.88-0.92; P < .001). Conclusion: Low-dose thin-section CT can be performed at lower effective doses than can standard CT, approaching those of chest radiography. Low-dose thin-section CT could be appropriate for evaluating bronchiectasis in pediatric patients, yielding appropriate information about lung parenchyma and bronchovascular structures. © RSNA, 2010.
  Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is an interstitial lung disease characterized by irreversible scarring. Collagen deposition, myofibroblast expansion, and the development of fibroblastic foci are the hallmark pathological events. The origin and mechanism of recruitment of myofibroblasts, the key cell contributing to these events, is unknown. We hypothesize that the fibrotic lung microenvironment causes differentiation of arriving bone marrow-derived cells into myofibroblasts. Therefore, a method of isolating the effects of fibrotic microenvironment components on various cell types was developed. Electrospun nanofibers were coated with lung extracts from fibrotic or non-fibrotic mice and used to determine effects on bone marrow cells from naïve mice. Varying moduli nanofibers were also employed to determine matrix stiffness effects on these cells. At structured time points, bone marrow cell morphology was recorded and changes in fibrotic gene expression determined by real-time PCR. Cells plated on extracts isolated from fibrotic murine lungs secreted larger amounts of extracellular matrix, adopted a fibroblastic morphology, and exhibited increased myofibroblast gene expression after 8 and 14 days; cells plated on extracts from non-fibrotic lungs did not. Similar results were observed when the nanofiber modulus was increased. This ex vivo system appears to recapitulate the three-dimensional fibrotic lung microenvironment.
  Aims:  To determine the feasibility of formulating and aerosolizing powders containing bacteriophages KS4-M and ΦKZ for lung delivery and treatment of pulmonary Burkholderia cepacia complex and Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections. Methods and Results:  Endotoxin-removed bacteriophages KS4-M and ΦKZ were lyophilized in lactose/lactoferrin 60 : 40 w/w matrix and deagglomerated in a mixer mill (without beads) to formulate respirable powders. The powders were then aerosolized using an Aerolizer(®) capsule inhaler. Mass median aerodynamic diameter (MMAD) of this inhalable aerosol was determined using Andersen cascade impactor at 60 l min(-1) . Measured MMAD for both types of powders was 3·4 μm, and geometric standard deviation was 1·9-2·0. Viability of bacteriophages delivered distal to an idealized mouth-throat replica was determined from bioassays of samples collected on filters placed after the idealized replica. As a percentage of inhaler load, amount of powder delivered distal to the mouth-throat replica, which is a measure of lung delivery, was 33·7 ± 0·3% for KS4-M and 32·7 ± 0·9% for ΦKZ. Titres collected downstream of the mouth throat were (3·4 ± 2·5) × 10(6)  PFU for KS4-M with an Aerolizer capsule load of (9·8 ± 4·8) × 10(6) and (1·9 ± 0·6) × 10(7) for ΦKZ with an Aerolizer capsule load of (6·5 ± 1·9) × 10(7) . Conclusions:  Bacteriophages KS4-M and ΦKZ can be lyophilized without significant loss of viability in a lactose/lactoferrin 60 : 40 w/w matrix. The resulting powders can be aerosolized to deliver viable bacteriophages to the lungs. Significance and Impact of the Study:  Development of lactoferrin-based bacteriophage aerosol powders solidifies the ground for future research on developing novel formulations as an alternative to inhaled antibiotic therapy in patients with cystic fibrosis.
  ABSTRACT Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a devastating disease without proper treatment. Despite intensive research, the exact underlying pathogenesis remains elusive. It is regarded as a continuous injury, resulting in inflammation, infiltration, and proliferation of fibroblasts and extracellular matrix deposition, leading to an irreversible restrictive lung function deterioration and death. In this study the effect of azithromycin, a macrolide antibiotic on bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis was investigated. C57BL/6 mice were intratracheally instilled with bleomycin (0.5 mg/kg) or saline. In the bleomycin group, half of the animals received azithromycin every other day from day 1 on. Bronchoalveolar lavage and histology were performed at days 7 and 35, and pulmonary function tests on day 35. At day 35, fibrotic lesions (spindle cell proliferation/collagen I deposition) were paralleled by a restrictive lung function pattern. Alterations were found in neutrophils and macrophages (innate immunity) and in T<inf>H</inf>2, T<inf>H</inf>17, and Treg cytokines (adaptive immunity). Azithromycin significantly reduced both fibrosis and the restrictive lung function pattern. This study demonstrated a beneficial effect of azithromycin on bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis. A possible mechanism could be a modulation of both innate immunity and adaptive immunity. These findings might suggest a potential role for azithromycin in the treatment of IPF.
  The results of a few studies evaluating the efficacy and safety of nebulized tobramycin solution used in patients with cystic fibrosis have been published to date. Pulmonary deposition of inhaled tobramycin and its lung produced concentrations are rather high (10-25 times greater than the minimum suppressing concentration) and systemic absorption is extremely low. The treatment makes it possible to improve external respiratory function, to lower the colonization of the bronchi with Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and, in many cases, to achieve its eradication. Inhaled tobramycin reduces the sputum level of inflammatory cytokines in patients with cystic fibrosis, which slows down irreversible lung changes. Inhaled antibacterial therapy results in a reduction in the number of exacerbations, the frequency of admissions, and the need for systemic antibiotics.
  BACKGROUND: Nitrite and nitrate are exhaled in droplets of an aerosol during breathing and can be assayed in the exhaled breath condensate (EBC) as markers of nitrossative stress in the airways of patients with asthma, COPD, and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Using HPLC with fluorescence detection, nitrite and nitrate were assayed in EBC of 14 atopic patients with mild-to-moderate stable asthma, 18 atopic asthmatics with exacerbation, 14 COPD patients without exacerbation, 18 patients with exacerbated COPD, 13 patients with active IPF, and in 29 healthy subjects. RESULTS: The geometric mean [exp(mean±SD)] EBC concentrations of nitrite (micromol/l) in patients with asthma [5.1(2.1-12.3)], exacerbation of asthma [5.1(2.8-9.6)], exacerbation of COPD [5.3(3.2-8.7)], and with IPF [5.5(2.9-10.2)] were higher (P<0.05) compared with those of healthy subjects [2.9(1.6-5.3)] and patients with stable COPD [3.0(1.3-6.7)]. Nitrite concentration increased with decreased lung function of patients with asthma (r(s)=-0.31, P<0.02). Presumably owing to the contamination of the EBC sample with nitrate during collection, nitrate levels were highly variable among healthy subjects and higher compared with all groups of patients. CONCLUSION: EBC nitrite is a suitable marker of nitrossative stress in adult patients with lung diseases but cannot differentiate controlled and exacerbated asthma. Further improvements to the methods of EBC collection and sample handling are warranted.
  A 61-year-old man with severe idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis developed subacute, bilateral lung torsion after uneventful double lung transplantation. Unenhanced chest computed tomography demonstrated abnormal orientations of both lung allografts with narrowing of the main and lobar bronchi. Surgical reexploration confirmed clockwise rotation of the left lung allograft and counterclockwise rotation of the right lung allograft around their respective hilar axes, as viewed from the ipsilateral axilla. Our case illustrates the value of computed tomography imaging in identifying abnormal lung orientation and bronchial narrowing, and we discuss the potential mechanism for this unusual postoperative event.
  Notch is an ancient cell signaling system that regulates cell fate specification. This study examined the role of Notch in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and myofibroblast differentiation of cultured RLE-6TN cells, rat alveolar epithelial cells. Activation of Notch, either by ectopic expression of Notch intracellular domain or by coculture of RLE-6TN cells with L-Jagged1 cells, induced the expression of the smooth muscle α-actin (SMA) and other mesenchymal marker genes (collagen I and vimentin) and reduced the expression of the epithelial marker genes (E-cadherin, occludin and zonula occludens-1). Pharmacological inhibition of endogenous Notch signal significantly inhibited transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β)-induced SMA expression. Cell migratory capacity was increased by Notch. Luciferase assays revealed that CArG box and TGF-β-control element (TCE) are required for Notch-induced SMA gene transcription. DNA microarray analysis revealed that members of TGF-β family as well as Jagged1 were induced in RLE-6TN cells by Notch. Western blot analysis showed that Notch induced phosphorylation of Smad3 and TGF-β receptor typeI/ALK5 kinase inhibitor SB431542 markedly reduced Notch-induced SMA expression. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays confirmed the production of TGF-β1 from RLE-6TN cells by Notch. Immunohistochemistry of bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis model and lung specimens from idiopathic interstitial pneumonias patients showed that Notch was strongly expressed in myofibroblasts as identified as SMA-positive cells. These data indicate that Notch induces myofibroblast differentiation through TGF-ß/Smad3 pathway which activates SMA gene transcription in a CArG- and TCE-dependent manner in alveolar epithelial cells. Our data also imply that Notch induces EMT phenotype with an increased migratory behavior in pulmonary fibrosis.
  Rationale: Patients receiving thoracic radiation often develop pulmonary injury and fibrosis. Currently, there are no effective measures to prevent or treat these conditions. Objectives: We tested whether blockade of the chemokine, CCL3, and its receptors, CCR1 and CCR5, can prevent radiation-induced lung inflammation and fibrosis. Methods: C57BL/6J mice received thoracic radiation, and the interaction of CCL3 with CCR1 or CCR5 was blocked using genetic techniques, or by pharmacologic intervention. Lung inflammation was assessed by histochemical staining of lung tissue, and by flow cytometry. Fibrosis was measured by hydroxyproline assays and collagen staining, and lung function was studied by invasive procedures. Results: Irradiated mice lacking CCL3 or its receptor, CCR1, did not develop the lung inflammation, fibrosis and decline in lung function seen in irradiated WT mice. Pharmacologic treatment of WT mice with a small molecule inhibitor of CCR1 also prevented lung inflammation and fibrosis. By contrast, mice lacking CCR5 were not protected from radiation induced injury and fibrosis. Conclusions: The selective interaction of CCL3 with its receptor, CCR1, is critical for radiation-induced lung inflammation and fibrosis, and these conditions can be largely prevented by a small molecule inhibitor of CCR1.
  RATIONALE: The respiratory epithelium has a remarkable capacity to respond to acute injury. In contrast, repeated epithelial injury is often associated with abnormal repair, inflammation and fibrosis. There is increasing evidence that non-ciliated epithelial cells play important roles in the repair of the bronchiolar epithelium following acute injury. Cellular processes underlying the repair and remodeling of the lung following chronic epithelial injury are poorly understood. OBJECTIVE: To identify cell processes mediating epithelial regeneration and remodeling after acute and chronic Clara cell depletion. METHODS: A transgenic mouse model was generated to conditionally express diphtheria toxin A to ablate Clara cells in the adult lung. Epithelial regeneration and peribronchiolar fibrosis were assessed after acute and chronic Clara cell depletion. MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Acute Clara cell ablation caused squamous metaplasia of ciliated cells and induced proliferation of residual progenitor cells. Ciliated cells in the bronchioles and pro-SPC expressing cells in the bronchiolar alveolar duct junctions did not proliferate. Epithelial cell proliferation occurred at multiple sites along the airways and was not selectively associated with regions around neuroepithelial bodies. Chronic Clara cell depletion resulted in ineffective repair and caused peribronchiolar fibrosis. CONCLUSIONS: Co-localization of proliferation and cell type specific markers demonstrate that Clara cells are critical airway progenitor cells. Continuous depletion of Clara cells resulted in persistent squamous metaplasia, lack of normal re-epithelialization and peribronchiolar fibrosis. Induction of proliferation in subepithelial fibroblasts, supports the concept that chronic epithelial depletion caused peribronchiolar fibrosis.
  Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the causal organism of tuberculosis (TB), is one of the oldest and still one of the deadliest pathogens known to man. Approximately 1 in 10 people with primary pulmonary tuberculosis (PTB) present clinically; of untreated cases, approximately 1 in 10 reactivate usually at a time of relative immunodeficiency. The spectrum of radiologic manifestations of PTB can pose a variety of diagnostic and management challenges. PTB infection often leaves long term sequelae of infection, particularly granulomatous nodules, cavitation, and fibrosis; distinguishing dormant disease from reactivation is not always clear-cut. The radiologic presentation of primary PTB infection tends to differ from that of post-primary PTB, but there is significant overlap in the appearances. Primary PTB typically presents with consolidation and regional lymphadenopathy, whereas post-primary PTB more often results in cavitation. The pathology and therefore the radiology of TB infection will be altered based on the efficacy of the immune response and will therefore vary depending on the immune competency. Clinically, in the presence of infection, the main questions are whether M tuberculosis is the infecting organism and, if treated, does the radiology indicate response to treatment. In order to interpret the radiology of TB one needs to be aware of the spectrum of presentation, the expected reaction to treatment, and the myriad of non-pulmonary sites of infection that may prove to be more clinically significant than the pulmonary infection.
  BACKGROUND: The mutation in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene results in CF. The most common mutation, ΔF508-CFTR, is a temperature-sensitive, trafficking mutant with reduced chloride transport and exaggerated immune response. The ΔF508-CFTR is misfolded, ubiquitinated, and prematurely degraded by proteasome mediated- degradation. We recently demonstrated that selective inhibition of proteasomal pathway by the FDA approved drug PS-341 (pyrazylcarbonyl-Phe-Leuboronate, a.k.a. Velcade or bortezomib) ameliorates the inflammatory pathophysiology of CF cells. This proteasomal drug is an extremely potent, stable, reversible and selective inhibitor of chymotryptic threonine protease-activity. The apprehension in considering the proteasome as a therapeutic target is that proteasome inhibitors may affect proteostasis and consecutive processes. The affect on multiple processes can be mitigated by nanoparticle mediated PS-341 lung-delivery resulting in favorable outcome observed in this study. RESULTS: To overcome this challenge, we developed a nano-based approach that uses drug loaded biodegradable nanoparticle (PLGA-PEGPS-341) to provide controlled and sustained drug delivery. The in vitro release kinetics of drug from nanoparticle was quantified by proteasomal activity assay from days 1-7 that showed slow drug release from day 2-7 with maximum inhibition at day 7. For in vivo release kinetics and biodistribution, these drug-loaded nanoparticles were fluorescently labeled, and administered to C57BL6 mice by intranasal route. Whole-body optical imaging of the treated live animals demonstrates efficient delivery of particles to murine lungs, 24 hrs post treatment, followed by biodegradation and release over time, day 1-11. The efficacy of drug release in CF mice (Cftr-/-) lungs was determined by quantifying the changes in proteasomal activity (~2 fold decrease) and ability to rescue the Pseudomonas aeruginosa LPS (Pa-LPS) induced inflammation, which demonstrates the rescue of CF lung disease in murine model. CONCLUSION: We have developed a novel drug delivery system to provide sustained delivery of CF "correctors" and "anti-inflammatories" to the lungs. Moreover, we demonstrate here the therapeutic efficacy of nano-based proteostasis-modulator to rescue Pa-LPS induced CF lung disease.
  BACKGROUND: Pseudomonas aeruginosa is the major respiratory pathogen causing severe lung infections among CF patients, leading to high morbidity and mortality. Once infection is established, early antibiotic treatment is able to postpone the transition to chronic lung infection. In order to optimize the early detection, we compared the sensitivity of microbiological culture and quantitative PCR (qPCR) for the detection of P. aeruginosa in respiratory samples of not chronically infected CF patients. RESULTS: In this national study, we followed CF patients during periods between 1 to 15 months. For a total of 852 samples, 729 (86%) remained P. aeruginosa negative by both culture and qPCR, whereas 89 samples (10%) were positive by both culture and qPCR.Twenty-six samples were negative by culture but positive by qPCR, and 10 samples were positive by culture but remained negative by qPCR. Five of the 26 patients with a culture negative, qPCR positive sample became later P. aeruginosa positive both by culture and qPCR. CONCLUSION: Based on the results of this study, it can be concluded that qPCR may have a predictive value for impending P. aeruginosa infection for only a limited number of patients.
  Exercise performance in individuals with cystic fibrosis has been shown to be related to the extent of pulmonary dysfunction and undernutrition and genetic profile. The aim of this study was to examine these relationships in young children with cystic fibrosis. The participants were 64 children ages 8 to 11 years (M = 9.3, SD = 0.9) with cystic fibrosis and pancreatic insufficiency recruited from 13 different U.S. cystic fibrosis centers. Assigned to one of three groups by deltaF508 status: deltaF508/deltaF508 homozygous, deltaF508/Other heterozygous, and Other/Other, growth, nutritional and pulmonary status, and exercise performance were measured. Differences in exercise performance, pulmonary function, and nutritional status were not observed among the three groups. However, undernutrition and decreased pulmonary function were associated with measures of exercise performance. These results imply no effect of deltaF508 status on overall functional capacity during preadolescence in children with cystic fibrosis. Rather, the extent of pulmonary disease and undernutrition were associated with functional performance.
  Cystic fibrosis is the most frequent and lethal inherited disease, affecting populations of European and Caucasian origin. Pneumothorax is life threatening pulmonary complication of cystic fibrosis. Bilateral pneumothorax is rarely seen and is a predictor of poor prognosis. We report a newborn presenting with bilateral pneumothorax whose diagnosis was cystic fibrosis with N1303K mutation on CFTR gene.
  ABSTRACT BACKGROUND: Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is often associated with elevation in pulmonary artery pressures. Although primary pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) has been associated with primary graft dysfunction (PGD), the role of secondary PAH in mediating PGD risk among IPF patients is incompletely understood. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the relationship between mean pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP) and PGD among patients with IPF. METHODS: We performed a multi-center prospective cohort study of 126 lung transplant procedures performed for IPF between March 2002 and August 2007. The primary outcome was Grade 3 PGD at 72 hours after lung transplant. mPAP was measured as the initial reading following insertion of the right heart catheter during lung transplant. Multivariable logistic regression was used to adjust for confounding variables. RESULTS: The mPAP for those with PGD was 38.5 ± 16.3 mm Hg in PGD patients vs. 29.6 ± 11.5 mm Hg in those without PGD (mean difference, 8.9 mm Hg [95% CI, 3.6, 14.2]; p = 0.001). The increase in odds of PGD associated with each 10 mmHg increase in mPAP was 1.64 (95%CI: 1.18, 2.26; p = 0.003). In multivariable models, this relationship was independent of confounding by other clinical variables, although the use of cardiopulmonary bypass partially attenuated the relationship. CONCLUSIONS: Higher mPAP in IPF patients is associated with the development of PGD.
  The treatment of pulmonary fibrosis continues to pose major difficulties. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), the most prevalent chronic fibrosing lung disease, is a devastating condition that carries a prognosis worse than that of many cancers. Abnormalities in multiple pathways involved in wound healing and inflammation lead to the development of this condition. High doses of corticosteroids are now contraindicated in IPF, although they have a role in other fibrosing lung diseases. More effective treatments are urgently required and a number of novel candidate therapies have been put forward, based on animal and in vitro work. As in other complex disorders, it is likely that combinations of agents, rather than single treatments, will be needed. The principle of combination therapy was recently endorsed by the guidelines of the British Thoracic Society, which make a weak recommendation for a combination of prednisolone, azathioprine and N-acetylcysteine. However, enrolment of patients into trials of new therapies is considered to be 'best current practice' as this offers sufferers with IPF the chance to receive new agents that may be more effective than current treatments. In pulmonary fibrotic disorders other than IPF, anti-inflammatory therapy is broadly appropriate and benefits most patients, but a clear treatment strategy is essential. The art of management is to distinguish accurately between inherently stable fibrotic disease (with treatment not required), progressive predominantly fibrotic disease (with low-dose long-term treatment warranted to retard progression) and the presence of major associated inflammation (justifying initial high-dose treatment).
  Asymptomatic 2 month-old infant referred for evaluation of a hard abdominal mass on the left side. The ultrasound examination showed a solid-cystic tumour above the left kidney. The alpha-fetoprotein level was 2000ng/ml. The meta-iodobenzylguanidine (123-I-MIBG) showed no tumour uptake. At 48h, she showed signs of hypovolemic shock. The chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly with a cardiothoracic ratio of 0.7 and pulmonary congestion. The echocardiogram showed a dilated left ventricle with ejection fraction 35-40%. Anaemia, hypertension, hypervolemia and hyper-secretion of catecholamines were ruled out. The virology and metabolic screens were normal. The highly vascularised retroperitoneal tumour was resected without incident and confirmed the diagnosis of an immature Norris grade 2 teratoma grade. At 3 months the outcome was satisfactory. Teratomas are rare tumours in childhood that generally have a benign course. Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) secondary to, chromaffin cell tumours (phaeochromocytoma, neuroblastoma, ganglioneuroblastoma), leukaemia infiltrates, and treatment with anthracyclines have been described, but there is no case reported in the literature regarding a teratoma with dilated cardiomyopathy. Various cytokines, such as INF-α, IL-1, IL-6 may be secreted by tumour, promoting fibroblast activity in the heart and inducing apoptosis and myocardial fibrosis. Thus, in the case presented resection of the tumour mass responsible for this production, enables the heart to return to normal.
  Obstructive uropathy in sarcoidosis can result from retroperitoneal involvement, retroperitoneal fibrosis (RPF), renal stones, or ureteral involvement. We report acute kidney injury (AKI) from obstructive uropathy because of RPF in a female patient, 2 years following the resolution of pulmonary sarcoidosis. We propose that RPF may occur in sarcoidosis even when a lag of years separates the presentations of the illnesses.
  In this study, we have evaluated the pulmonary toxicity of intratracheally (i.t.) instilled two multi walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) in rats. The lungs of rats were instilled with phosphate buffered saline + 1% of Tween 80 or MWCNT or carbonyl iron or quartz particles at a dose of 0.2, 1, and 5 mg/kg b.w. Following exposure, bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid was collected from the lungs to analyze lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), lipid peroxidation products (MDA; malondialdehyde), and total microprotein (MTP) levels at 24 h, one week, one month, and three months post instillation periods. The lungs of particle exposed rats were also collected at the same intervals to evaluate for histopathology. Exposures of MWCNT and quartz particles to rats produced transient dose dependant increase in BAL fluid LDH, ALP, MDA, and MTP values than control at all post exposure periods. Results of lung histopathology revealed that exposure of MWCNT produced a dose dependant focal peribronchiolar lymphoid aggregates, foamy alveolar macrophage accumulation, lymphoplasmocytic infiltration, fibrosis and diffuse alveolar damage. In conclusion, instillation of MWCNT produced a greater pulmonary toxicity in rats and was comparable with that of quartz. © 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Environ Toxicol, 2010.
  Background: Chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) can lead to irreversible pulmonary fibrosis. A good animal model is essential to elucidate the mechanisms of this disease. We previously reported that a Th2 predominance may play an important role in the fibrogenesis in chronic HP patients. A study was undertaken to evaluate whether Th2-biased immune responses were crucial during the processes of lung fibrosis in a murine model of chronic HP. Methods: Instillation of pigeon dropping extracts (PDE) was conducted 3 days a week for 6 or 12 weeks in C57BL/6, BALB/c and A/J mice to establish models of chronic HP. We evaluated the histopathological features, immunohistochemistry, collagen content, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) profiles and Th1/Th2 cytokines in BALF or lung tissue with RT-PCR and ELISA. Results: Thickening of the alveolar walls and structural alterations were observed only in the A/J mice after 12 weeks of exposure to PDE. The fibrosis scores were significantly increased in 12-week A/J mice compared to those in the other strains. Immunohistochemistry evaluation showed that PDE was engulfed by alveolar macrophages that were incorporated into the alveolar septa of 12-week A/J mice. Interleukin (IL)-4 mRNA increased significantly in 6- and 12-week A/J mice. IL-13 mRNA showed a significant increase in 12-week A/J mice compared with 6-week A/J mice. TGF-β1 mRNA at 12 weeks was significantly increased in A/J mice compared with the other groups. Conclusion: Th2-biased genetic backgrounds may play an important role in fibrosing processes in the present chronic HP model.
  Monitoring Editor: Yu-Li Wang Ablation of nonmuscle myosin (NM) II-A or NM II-B results in mouse embryonic lethality. Here we report the results of ablating NM II-C as well as NM II-C/II-B together in mice. NM II-C ablated mice survive to adulthood and show no obvious defects compared with wild-type littermates. However, ablation of NM II-C in mice expressing only 12% of wild-type amounts of NM II-B results in a marked increase in cardiac myocyte hypertrophy compared with the NM II-B hypomorphic mice alone. In addition, these hearts develop interstitial fibrosis associated with diffuse N-cadherin and β-catenin localization at the intercalated discs, where both NM II-B and II-C are normally concentrated. When both NM II-C and II-B are ablated the B(-)C(-)/B(-)C(-) cardiac myocytes show major defects in karyokinesis. Over 90% of B(-)C(-)/B(-)C(-) myocytes demonstrate defects in chromatid segregation and mitotic spindle formation accompanied by increased stability of microtubules and abnormal formation of multiple centrosomes. This requirement for NM II in karyokinesis is further demonstrated in the HL-1 cell line derived from mouse atrial myocytes, using siRNA knockdown of NM II or treatment with the myosin inhibitor blebbistatin. Our study shows that NM II is involved in regulating cardiac myocyte karyokinesis by affecting microtubule dynamics.
  RATIONALE: The St George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) is often applied to assess health-related quality of life in patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). Some SGRQ items will inevitably have weaker measurement properties than others when applied to this population. This study was conducted to develop an IPF-specific version of the SGRQ. METHODS: Data from a recently completed trial that enrolled subjects with IPF (n=158) who completed the SGRQ and other measures were analysed at baseline and 6 months. There were four phases to the study: (1) removing items with missing responses and using Rasch analysis on retained items to identify fit and refine item response categories; (2) development of a new scoring scheme; (3) testing agreement between original and revised versions and testing construct validity of the revised SGRQ; and (4) rewording to finalise the IPF-specific version (SGRQ-I). RESULTS: Items were removed due to missing responses (6 items) and misfit to the Rasch model (10 items); 34 items from the original 50 were retained. For certain items, disordered response thresholds were identified and corrected by collapsing response categories. A scoring algorithm was developed to place SGRQ-I scores on a scale with SGRQ scores. For any given outcome measure (eg, forced vital capacity (% predicted) and lung carbon monoxide transfer factor (% predicted), 6-min walk distance and patient-reported questionnaires), Pearson correlations were similar between pairs that included original SGRQ scores and corresponding pairs that included SGRQ-I scores. Internal reliability (Cronbach α) for each SGRQ-I component was comparable to the original SGRQ (Symptoms 0.62; Activities 0.80; Impacts 0.85). CONCLUSIONS: The SGRQ-I contains items from the original SGRQ that are the most reliable for measuring health-related quality of life in patients with IPF.
  ABSTRACT Human and animal studies of acute lung injury (ALI) have shown that matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play an important role in disease pathogenesis, but despite being detected during ALI, the function of the collagenase MMP-13 in ALI is unknown. To evaluate this role of MMP-13, mice deficient in MMP-13 (KO) were examined after hyperoxic lung injury, and compared to wild-type (WT) mice. There was no survival difference between KO and WT mice. There was also no difference in fibrosis between WT and KO mice, as determined by hydroxyproline content and collagen expression by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Within the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), the KO mice exhibited a significant increase in inflammatory cells, when compared to the WT mice (5.51 × 10(5) versus 2.35 × 10(5) cells/mL; P = .001). Increased levels of the chemokine monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (MCP-1) were observed in the lungs of the KO mice, confirmed via immunohistochemistry. In a subsequent in vitro experiment, MMP-13 was shown to cleave MCP-1. In ALI in the MMP-13 KO mice, MCP-1 could therefore remain active and potentially attract macrophages to the BAL. This study suggests a direct role for MMP-13 in modifying the inflammatory response in the lung after ALI.
  BACKGROUND: The optimal dose and efficacy of ¹³¹I treatment of children and adolescents with well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma (WDTC) and pulmonary metastases are not well established. A therapeutic challenge is to achieve the maximum benefit of ¹³¹I to decrease disease-related morbidity and obtain disease-free survival while avoiding the potential complications of ¹³¹I therapy. SUMMARY: We systematically reviewed the published literature on children and adolescents with WDTC and pulmonary metastases treated with ¹³¹I to examine outcomes after ¹³¹I administration and the risks and benefits of therapy. After reviewing 14 published articles, 9 articles met our inclusion criteria encompassing 112 pediatric and adolescent patients with WDTC and pulmonary metastases 21 years of age or younger at diagnosis spanning a follow-up period of 0.6–45 years. ¹³¹I therapy after surgery and thyrotropin suppression resulted in complete, partial, and no disease response in 47.32%, 38.39%, and 14.29% of patients, respectively. Five studies provided data on disease response in relation to ¹³¹I dose. In general, nonresponders received the highest ¹³¹I doses and complete responders received a higher dose than partial responders. The disease-specific mortality rate was 2.68%. Survival was 97.32%. A second primary malignancy occurred in one patient. One out of 11 patients studied experienced radiation fibrosis. CONCLUSIONS: This review confirms that the majority of pediatric and adolescent patients with WDTC and pulmonary metastases treated with ¹³¹I do not achieve complete response to therapy, yet disease-specific morbidity and mortality appear to remain low. It is therefore prudent to use caution in the repeated administration of ¹³¹I to such patients to ensure that adverse effects of therapy do not cause more harm than good in a disease that has an overall favorable natural course. Long-term prospective studies are needed to analyze disease-specific morbidity and mortality, recurrence rate, dose-specific response, and dose-related adverse effects of ¹³¹I in this patient population.
  Background/Objectives:The hallmark of cystic fibrosis (CF) is chronic lung inflammation. The severity of lung disease is closely correlated with immunoglobulin G (IgG) levels. Beyond its contribution to the bone health, the importance of vitamin D has not been fully recognized owing to the lack of human studies providing evidence of its benefit. In the context of the recently described immunomodulatory functions of vitamin D, we aimed to assess the relationship between vitamin D and IgG levels.Subjects/Methods:Eight hundred and ninety-six CF patients were included (0.53-65.9 years) from seven centers in Denmark, Norway and Sweden. Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25OHD) and total IgG were measured, spirometry was carried out and vitamin D intake data were gathered using a 7-day dietary food record. Multiple linear regression analyses were performed for IgG and forced expiratory volume in 1λs (FEV1) as dependent variables, and serum 25OHD, daily food and supplemented vitamin D sources of intake as independent variables. The model was controlled for age, gender, genotype, CF-related diabetes, season, infection/colonization status, long-term oral corticosteroid treatment, long-term treatment with macrolide antibiotics, pancreatic insufficient phenotype and body mass index z-score.Results:Serum total IgG levels were negatively associated with serum 25OHD (adjusted R (2)=0.376; beta=-0.02; P<0.001), supplemented vitamin D intake per kg bodyweight (adjusted R (2)=0.375; beta=-0.82; P<0.001) and total vitamin D intake per kg bodyweight (adjusted R (2)=0.398; beta=-0.60; P=0.002). Serum 25OHD was positively associated with FEV1 (adjusted R (2)=0.308; beta=0.0007; P=0.025).Conclusions:Increasing vitamin D intake may positively modulate inflammation in CF. This study supports the proposed role of vitamin D in the immune system during infection and substantiates prospective studies.European Journal of Clinical Nutrition advance online publication, 22 September 2010; doi:10.1038/ejcn.2010.194.
  Pulmonary fibrosis is a common feature of a large group of lung diseases. The molecular mechanisms underlying pulmonary fibrosis and the key macromolecules involved are not fully understood yet. In an effort to better understand aspects of pulmonary fibrosis, the established bleomycin injection model in mice was used and the focus of the present study was on integrin-linked kinase (ILK) expression. ILK is an intracellular protein involved in the regulation of integrin-mediated processes. In fibrosis, ILK has been examined in the kidney and in the liver where it mediates epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and hepatic stellate cell activation, respectively. However, information on ILK's involvement in lung fibrosis is missing. In order to examine ILK's role in pulmonary fibrosis, we used both an in vivo and an in vitro approach. In vivo, the bleomycin model was used in order to examine ILK's expression and localization in the fibrotic lung. In vitro, transforming growth factor-β1 was used to induce fibrotic characteristics and EMT in alveolar epithelial cells. ILK's role in alveolar EMT was studied by siRNA. Our results demonstrate that in the animal model used, ILK exhibits a decrease in expression at early stages of the fibrotic process and that a specific subset of fibroblasts is expressing ILK. The in vitro experiments suggested that ILK is not directly involved in E-cadherin downregulation and initiation of EMT (as is the case in renal fibrosis) but is involved in upregulation of vimentin. These results suggest that ILK is involved in lung fibrosis in a tissue-specific manner and raise the possibility to use it as a specific therapeutic target for lung fibrosis in the future.
  The Gram-negative bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a common cause of chronic airway infections in individuals with the heritable disease cystic fibrosis (CF). After prolonged colonization of the CF lung, P. aeruginosa becomes highly resistant to host clearance and antibiotic treatment; therefore, understanding how this bacterium evolves during chronic infection is important for identifying beneficial adaptations that could be targeted therapeutically. To identify potential adaptive traits of P. aeruginosa during chronic infection, we carried out global transcriptomic profiling of chronological clonal isolates obtained from 3 individuals with CF. Isolates were collected sequentially over periods ranging from 3 months to 8 years, representing up to 39,000 in vivo generations. We identified 24 genes that were commonly regulated by all 3 P. aeruginosa lineages, including several genes encoding traits previously shown to be important for in vivo growth. Our results reveal that parallel evolution occurs in the CF lung and that at least a proportion of the traits identified are beneficial for P. aeruginosa chronic colonization of the CF lung.
  Previous studies showed that apoptotic epithelial cells were involved in the pathogenesis of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF)/usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP); however, little is known about apoptosis in chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP). This study was performed to examine whether apoptosis has a role in chronic HP. We performed immunohistochemical studies for p53, p21, Fas, Fas ligand, and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate-biotin nick-end labeling methods on surgical lung specimens. The expression of Fas and Fas ligand was up-regulated in UIP-like lesions compared with nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP)-like lesions. The expression of p53 and p21 on epithelial cells increased significantly in UIP-like lesions compared with fibrotic NSIP-like lesions and in fibrotic NSIP-like lesions compared with normal lung tissues. These results confirm that apoptotic epithelial cells are present in chronic HP as seen in IPF. Augmented epithelial apoptosis may contribute much more to UIP-like lesions than to NSIP-like lesions in chronic HP.
  Inflammation-induced pulmonary fibrosis (PF) leads to irreversible loss of lung function and is a predictor of mortality in numerous lung diseases. Why some subjects with lung inflammation but not others develop PF is unclear. In a mouse model of hypersensitivity pneumonitis that progresses to lung fibrosis upon repeated exposure to the ubiquitous microorganism Bacillus subtilis, γδ T cells expand in the lung and inhibit collagen deposition. We show that a subset of these γδ cells represents the predominant source of the Th17 cytokine IL-22 in this model. Preventing expression of IL-22, either by mutating the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) or inhibiting AhR signaling, accelerated lung fibrosis. Direct blockade of IL-22 also enhanced collagen deposition in the lung, whereas administration of recombinant IL-22 inhibited lung fibrosis. Moreover, the presence of protective γδ T cells and IL-22 diminished recruitment of CD4(+) T cells to lung. These data reveal a protective pathway that involves the inhibition of αβ T cells by regulatory IL-22-secreting γδ T cells.
  Churg A, Wright J L & Tazelaar H D (2010) Histopathology Acute exacerbations of fibrotic interstitial lung disease An acute exacerbation is the development of acute lung injury, usually resulting in acute respiratory distress syndrome, in a patient with a pre-existing fibrosing interstitial pneumonia. By definition, acute exacerbations are not caused by infection, heart failure, aspiration or drug reaction. Most patients with acute exacerbations have underlying usual interstitial pneumonia, either idiopathic or in association with a connective tissue disease, but the same process has been reported in patients with fibrotic non-specific interstitial pneumonia, fibrotic hypersensitivity pneumonitis, desquamative interstitial pneumonia and asbestosis. Occasionally an acute exacerbation is the initial manifestation of underlying interstitial lung disease. On biopsy, acute exacerbations appear as diffuse alveolar damage or bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia (BOOP) superimposed upon the fibrosing interstitial pneumonia. Biopsies may be extremely confusing, because the acute injury pattern can completely obscure the underlying disease; a useful clue is that diffuse alveolar damage and organizing pneumonia should not be associated with old dense fibrosis and peripheral honeycomb change. Consultation with radiology can also be extremely helpful, because the fibrosing disease may be evident on old or concurrent computed tomography scans. The aetiology of acute exacerbations is unknown, and the prognosis is poor; however, some patients survive with high-dose steroid therapy.
  Tazelaar H D, Wright J L & Churg A (2010) Histopathology Desquamative interstitial pneumonia Desquamative interstitial pneumonia (DIP) is one of the rarest of the idiopathic interstitial pneumonias. It is characterized by the accumulation of macrophages in large numbers in the alveolar spaces associated with interstitial inflammation and/or fibrosis. The macrophages frequently contain light brown pigment, and because of their association with smoking have been called 'smoker's macrophages'. Lymphoid nodules are common, as is a sparse but distinct eosinophil infiltrate. Most cases of DIP are caused by cigarette smoking, but drugs and other inhaled agents, including marijuana smoke, can also produce the same disease. Although respiratory bronchiolitis-interstitial lung disease (RB-ILD) is a closely related process, there are prognostic reasons for continuing to separate it from DIP when possible. The proposed relationship of DIP to fibrotic non-specific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP) remains uncertain. The prognosis of DIP appears to be significantly better than that of fibrotic NSIP, so while there can be morphological overlap between the two, merging them into one disease may hide important prognostic information. Although the majority of DIP patients improve on treatment, some patients develop progressive irreversible fibrosis.
  Wright J L, Tazelaar H D & Churg A (2010) Histopathology Fibrosis with emphysema The concept of fibrosis with emphysema is confused by the existence of two very different clinical/pathological scenarios: first, cases in which a diffuse fibrosing interstitial pneumonia, most commonly usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP), occurs in a patient with emphysema. This combination is largely of clinical interest because of its effects on pulmonary function and pulmonary hypertension, but can produce unusual appearances in surgical lung biopsies when the fibrotic areas are wrapped around emphysematous spaces. However, the underlying morphology of emphysema and UIP or other interstitial lung disease remains unchanged. Radiological consultation is often helpful to show that the patient has both lesions; secondly, cases in which there is localized fibrosis that is part of emphysema, or related to respiratory bronchiolitis, or both. These lesions have been called 'respiratory bronchiolitis' (RB), 'respiratory bronchiolitis-interstitial lung disease' (RB-ILD), 'airspace enlargement with fibrosis', 'RB-ILD with fibrosis' and 'clinically occult interstitial fibrosis in smokers', but are probably all the same entity. Such changes are associated only rarely with the physiological or radiological features of an interstitial lung disease. Care should be taken when describing these lesions in biopsies so as not to give the impression that a diffuse interstitial lung disease is present.
  New regulations on the protection and rights of workers occupationally exposed to asbestos were introduced in Croatia in 2007 and 2008. They have been harmonised with the European Union (EU) and International Labour Organization (ILO) regulations, and make a step forward in safety at work, health protection, social rights, and pension schemes for Croatian workers occupationally exposed to asbestos. The 2007 Croatian regulation on the protection of workers from the risks related to exposure to asbestos at work defines and describes activities in which workers can be occupationally exposed to asbestos, defines the threshold value of asbestos in the air at work, defines valid methods for measurement of asbestos concentrations in the air, and establishes measures to reduce asbestos exposure at work or protect the exposed workers. Croatian law regulating obligatory health surveillance of workers occupationally exposed to asbestos from year 2007 defines activities and competent authorities to implement health surveillance of workers occupationally exposed to asbestos and to diagnose occupational diseases related to asbestos. This law also defines "occupational exposure to asbestos", and "occupational asbestos-related diseases", including asbestosis (pulmonary asbestos-related fibrosis), pleural asbestos-related disorders (plaques, pleural thickening, and benign effusion), lung and bronchial cancer, and malignant mesothelioma of serous membranes. These regulations have been harmonised with ILO, Directive 2003/18/EC amending Council Directive 83/477/EEC on the protection of workers from the risks related to exposure to asbestos at work, and with the Commission Recommendation 2003/670/EC concerning the European schedule of occupational diseases. The 2008 Croatian regulation on conditions of health surveillance, diagnostic procedures and criteria for confirmation of occupational asbestos-related diseases "defines the terms and the content of medical examination of workers exposed to asbestos, and criteria for the confirmation of occupational asbestos-related diseases which are harmonised with the Helsinki criteria acknowledged by ILO and EU, particularly concerning the level and length of exposure. Croatian law on compensation of workers occupationally exposed to asbestos from 2007 regulates compensation claims for workers with occupational asbestos-related disease, authorities competent to process these claims, and funds and coefficients for compensation payments. Accordingly, Croatia is responsible for compensation claims payment for workers with occupational asbestos-related disease. The 2007 law on conditions for entitlement to full pension for workers exposed to asbestos at work defines the conditions for fulfilling criteria for retirement pension for workers exposed to asbestos at work.
  Impairment of respiratory function is one of the most sensitive indicators used in the evaluation of the effects of air pollution on human health. We compared predicted values of flow-volume curve according to Knudson and the spirometry results in 81 healthy children; 40 girls and 41 boy, aged (10.69 +/- 2.24) years. We also measured the transfer factor of the lungs for carbon monoxide (TLCO) using the single-breath method and compared the results with reference values by Cotes. Patients were selected randomly among pre-school and elementary school children from the Split area, who were residentially exposed to asbestos. Children with atopic diseases, family history of atopy, history of severe respiratory diseases, and history of smoking were excluded from study. We found a statistically significant difference in FVC (p < 0.0001) from normal values according to Knudson, but when expressed in the percentage of the Knudson values, this difference was not significant (p > 0.05). No statistically significant difference was found for FEV1, FEF75, FEF50, FEF25, and FEV1/FVC. TLCO reached (107.37 +/- 20.50)% of normal values according to Cotes, and was not significantly different. At this point, it is hard to predict the consequences of exposure to low levels of asbestos in childhood, because it takes a long time for complications such as neoplasms, pulmonary fibrosis, or respiratory insufficiency to develop.
  Asbestos is a generic name for a group of silicate minerals. The most common are chrysotile, crocidolite, amosite, tremolite and anthophyllite. Exposure to asbestos may cause asbestos-related non-malignant diseases of the lung and pleura, including asbestosis, pleural plaques, diffuse pleural fibrosis, small airway disease, and malignant diseases such as lung cancer and malignant mesothelioma. Inhaled asbestos fibres deposit in the distal regions of the respiratory system where they interact with epithelial cells and alveolar macrophages, and trigger active immunological response which leads to a slowly progressing lung fibrosis. Asbestos may affect immunocompetent cells and induce malignant transformation of mesothelial cells. It is still not clear whether asbestos causes mesothelioma directly or indirectly. There is a general opinion that malignant mesothelioma is a complex tumour that results from the accumulation of multiple genetic alterations over many years. There is no specific antibody for malignant mesothelioma as yet which could act as a single diagnostic tool. Recent studies have demonstrated that asbestos acts on peripheral T cells as superantigen and that in malignant mesothelioma patients there is an overexpression of the Bcl-2 gene on peripheral CD4+ T cells. These findings contribute to better understanding of biological effects of asbestos in respect to the duration and intensity of exposure.
  Studies of matrix metaloproteinases in patients with occupational bronchopulmonary diseases and in individuals exposed to asbestos dust revealed hyperactivated protease system--lower level of MMP-1 proenzyme and increased production of TIMP-1 (metaloproteinases inhibitor)--in all the examinees groups. Patients with pneumoconiosis and occupational dust bronchitis demonstrated increased neutrophilic elastase that is activator of metaloproteinases inducing sclerotic changes and pulmonary fibrosis.
  RATIONALE: In aging HIV-infected populations, comorbid diseases are important determinants of morbidity and mortality. Pulmonary diseases have not been systematically assessed in the combination antiretroviral therapy (ART) era. OBJECTIVES: Determine the incidence of pulmonary diseases in HIV-infected compared to uninfected persons. METHODS: We analyzed data from the Veterans Aging Cohort Study Virtual Cohort, consisting of 33,420 HIV-infected and 66,840 age, gender, race/ethnicity and site-matched HIV-uninfected Veterans. Using Poisson regression, incidence rates and adjusted incidence rate ratios (IRR) were calculated to determine the association of HIV with pulmonary disease. The Virtual Cohort was merged with the 1999 Veterans Large Health Survey to adjust for self-reported smoking in a nested sample (14%). MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Incident COPD, lung cancer, pulmonary hypertension, and pulmonary fibrosis, as well as pulmonary infections, were significantly more likely among HIV-infected compared to HIV-uninfected patients in adjusted analyses, although rates of asthma did not differ by HIV status. Bacterial pneumonia and COPD were the two most common incident pulmonary diseases, whereas opportunistic pneumonias were less common. Absolute rates of most pulmonary diseases increased with age, although the relative differences between those with and without HIV infection were greatest in younger persons. COPD and asthma, as well as pulmonary infections, were less likely in those with lower HIV RNA levels and use of ART at baseline. CONCLUSIONS: Pulmonary diseases among HIV-infected patients receiving care within the Veterans Affairs Healthcare System in the combination ART era reflect a substantial burden of non-AIDS defining and chronic conditions, many of which are associated with aging.
  A 62-year-old woman with a past history of chronic hepatitis C virus infection presented an atypical predominantly painful polymyositis following a flu-like syndrome, persisting despite the withdrawal of PEG-interferon alpha-2b therapy. Clinical assessment, then immunological, electrophysiological and iconographic investigations including myositis antibodies, electromyography, pulmonary functions assessment and thoracic CT-scan found respectively "mechanic hands", arthralgia, presence of antisynthetase anti-PL7 antibody, typical myographic features of hip and shoulder girdles involvement, pulmonary fibrosis and restrictive syndrome features. A deltoid muscle biopsy revealed an unclassified myositis getting closer to anti-J0-1 and connective tissue disease associated myositis featuring: some components of polymyositis, dermatomyositis, and the following peculiar pathological aspects: noncaseous granulomatous infiltrate, endomysial microangiopathy and vascular and sarcolemic deposition of complement membrane attack complex. The diagnosis of interferon induced anti-PL7 antisynthetase syndrome with microangiopathic and granulomatous overlap myositis was retained. A treatment associating intravenous immunoglobulin and moderate tapered oral corticosteroids allowed a complete long-term resolution of myositis and a clear improvement of pulmonary involvement. This case points out the wide range of interferon alpha-associated disorders and call for a precise and detailed immunopathological analysis of myositis, instead of the usual vague classification as idiopathic polymyositis or dermatomyositis about antisynthetase syndrome.
  Fibrosis is a severe and progressive sequel of many pulmonary diseases, has no effective therapy at present and, consequently, represents a serious health problem. In Latin America, chronic pulmonary paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM) is one of the most important, prevalent and systemic fungal diseases that allows the development of lung fibrosis, with the additional disadvantage that this sequel may appear even after an apparently successful course of antifungal therapy. In this study, was propose the pentoxifylline as complementary treatment in the pulmonary PCM due to its immunomodulatory and anti-fibrotic properties demonstrated in vitro and in vivo in liver, skin and lung. Our objective was to investigate the possible beneficial effects that a combined antifungal (Itraconazole) and immunomodulatory (Pentoxifylline) therapy would have in the development of fibrosis in a model of experimental chronic pulmonary PCM in an attempt to simulate the naturally occurring events in human patients. Two different times post-infection (PI) were chosen for starting therapy, an "early time" (4 weeks PI) when fibrosis was still absent and a "late time" (8 weeks PI) when the fibrotic process had started. Infected mice received the treatments via gavage and were sacrificed during or upon termination of treatment; their lungs were then removed and processed for immunological and histopathologic studies in order to assess severity of fibrosis. When pulmonary paracoccidioidomycosis had evolved and reached an advanced stage of disease before treatment began (as normally occurs in many human patients when first diagnosed), the combined therapy (itraconazole plus pentoxifylline) resulted in a significantly more rapid reduction of granulomatous inflammation and pulmonary fibrosis, when compared with the results of classical antifungal therapy using itraconazole alone.
  There are no European Guidelines on issues specifically related to travel for people with cystic fibrosis (CF). The contributors to these recommendations included 30 members of the ECORN-CF project. The document is endorsed by the European Cystic Fibrosis Society and sponsored by the Executive Agency of Health and Consumers of the European Union and the Christiane Herzog Foundation. The main goal of this paper is to provide patient-oriented advice that complements medical aspects by offering practical suggestions for all aspects involved in planning and taking a trip. The report consists of three main sections, preparation for travel, important considerations during travel and at the destination, and issues specific to immunocompromised travellers. People with CF should be encouraged to consult with their CF centre prior to travel to another country. The CF centre can advise on the necessary preparation for travel, the need for vaccinations, essential medications that should be brought on the trip and also provide information relating to CF care in the region and plan of action in case of an emergency.
  CONTEXT: Most patients with advanced cystic fibrosis (CF) die from respiratory failure and experience distressing symptoms as lung disease progresses. Little has been reported about symptom management and the continuation of disease-specific treatments near the end of life for patients with CF. OBJECTIVE: We aimed to describe symptom prevalence, symptom management, and frequency of use of disease-specific treatments for patients dying from complications of CF. METHODS: We conducted semistructured interviews about end-of-life care in CF with bereaved family caregivers and asked questions about symptoms and treatments. RESULTS: Twenty-seven caregivers answered questions about symptoms and treatments. Caregivers reported that distressing symptoms were common during the last week of life, including dyspnea (100%), fatigue (96%), anorexia (85%), anxiety (74%), pain (67%), and cough (56%). Most caregivers felt that symptom control was "somewhat good." Many reported that medical providers "did the best they could" to manage symptoms but four (15%) recalled no physician inquiry about symptoms. Caregivers expressed beliefs that symptoms could not be controlled and described concerns about side effects and potential for hastening death with the use of opioids and anxiolytics. Patients received numerous disease-specific treatments, and caregivers described many of them as uncomfortable but necessary. CONCLUSIONS: Distressing symptoms are common in dying CF patients, and disease-specific treatments also cause discomfort. Many family caregivers have low expectations for symptom control. This exploratory research can be used to inform clinical interventions to improve symptom management for patients with advanced CF.
  Silica and asbestos cause pneumoconioses known as silicosis and asbestosis, respectively, that are each characterized by progressive pulmonary fibrosis. While local effects of inhaled silica particles alter the function of alveolar macrophages and sequential cellular and molecular biological events, general systemic immunological effects may also evolve. One well-known health outcome associated with silica exposure/silicosis is an increase in the incidence of autoimmune disorders. In addition, while exposure to silica-in the crystalline form-has also been seen to be associated with the development of lung cancers, it remains unclear as to whether or not silicosis is a necessary condition for the elevation of silica-associated lung cancer risks. Since asbestos is a mineral silicate, it would be expected to also possess generalized immunotoxicological effects similar to those associated with silica particles. However, asbestos-exposed patients are far better known than silicotic patients for development of malignant diseases such as lung cancer and mesothelioma, and less so for the development of autoimmune disorders. With both asbestos and crystalline silica, one important dysregulatory outcome that needs to be considered is an alteration in tumor immunity that allows for silica- or asbestos- (or asbestos-associated agent)-induced tumors to survive and thrive in situ. In this review, the immunotoxicological effects of both silica and asbestos are presented and contrasted in terms of their abilities to induce immune system dysregulation that then are manifest by the onset of autoimmunity or by alterations in host-tumor immunity.
  INTRODUCTION: Asbestos is banned in most Western countries but related malignancies are still of clinical concern because of their long latencies. This review identifies and addresses some controversial occupational and clinical aspects of asbestos-related malignancies. METHODS: Papers published in English from 1980 to 2009 were retrieved from PubMed. A total of 307 original articles were identified and 159 were included. ASSESSMENT OF EXPOSURE: The retrospective assessment of exposure is usually performed by using questionnaires and job exposure matrices and by careful collection of medical history. In this way crucial information about manufacturing processes and specific jobs can be obtained. In addition, fibers and asbestos bodies are counted in lung tissue, broncho-alveolar lavage, and sputum, but different techniques and interlaboratory variability hamper the interpretation of reported measurements. SCREENING FOR MALIGNANCIES: The effectiveness of low-dose chest CT screening in exposed workers is debatable. Several biomarkers have also been considered to screen individuals at risk for lung cancer and mesothelioma but reliable signatures are still missing. ATTRIBUTION OF LUNG CANCER: Exposures correlating with lung cancer are high and in the same range where asbestosis occurs. However, the unresolved question is whether the presence of fibrosis is a requirement for the attribution of lung cancer to asbestos. The etiology of lung cancer is difficult to define in cases of low-level asbestos exposure and concurrent smoking habits. MESOTHELIOMA: The diagnosis of malignant mesothelioma may also be difficult, because of procedures in sampling, fixation, and processing, and uses of immunohistochemical probes. CONCLUSIONS: Assessment of exposure is crucial and requires accurate medical and occupational histories. Quantitative analysis of asbestos body burden is better performed in digested lung tissues by counting asbestos bodies by light microscopy and/or uncoated fibers by transmission electron microscopy. The benefits of screenings for asbestos-related malignancies are equivocal. The attribution of lung cancer to asbestos exposure is difficult in a clinical setting because of the need to assess asbestos body burden and the fact that virtually all these patients are also tobacco smokers or former smokers. Given the premise that asbestosis is necessary to causally link lung cancer to asbestos, it follows that the assessment of both lung fibrosis and asbestos body burden is necessary.
  A 70-year-old male smoker, with a three-month status of post-balloon angioplasty for ischaemic heart disease, presented with a one-week history of fever, haemoptysis and chest discomfort on coughing. The patient did not report any loss of weight or appetite. On examination, he was febrile. Pulmonary function tests revealed obstructive airway disease. High resolution computed tomography of the lungs revealed fibrosis with bronchiectasis in both the upper lobes, and a spiculating subpleural mass in the posterior aspect of the right lung apex. Subsequent bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) culture yielded the Scopulariopsis species. Our patient was treated with a four-week course of amphotericin B, followed by itraconazole. At the 24-month follow-up, the patient was asymptomatic. Subsequent BAL cultures revealed no fungal growths, and radiological studies showed a regression in the lesion.
  Significant survival heterogeneity exists in cystic fibrosis (CF). Our aim was to determine whether residual function of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) is present in long-term survivors with severe mutations. Nasal potential difference (PD) and sweat chloride were measured in 34 long-term survivors (aged ≥40 years) - compared to young patients (18-23 years) with severe (n=30) and mild (n=31) lung disease. Baseline PD was not significantly different across the three groups (long-term survivors, -42.8(range -71.0 to -20.5)mV; young/mild, -40.5(-58.8 to -19.5); young/severe,-46.3(-74.0 to -20.0)). Response to amiloride (ΔAmil) was significantly different across the three groups (p=0.01); long-term survivors had values (27.8 (8.5-46)mV) which were not different to either young group but the young/severe group had significantly higher values (29.5 (11-47)mV) than those in the young/mild group (22.0 (7-39)mV; p<0.01). Baseline PD and ΔAmil were associated with FEV1 (co-efficient -0.13 (95% CI -0.23, -0.03; p=0.009) and -0.12 (95% CI (-0.20, -0.04; p=0.003), respectively). Sweat chloride was lowest (p<0.05) in the young/severe group (93.5 (74-111)mmol·l(-1) vs. 98.8 (76.5-116.0; long-term survivors) and 99.5 (80.0-113.5; young/mild)). ΔAmil is associated with FEV1 but our findings indicate that long-term survival cannot be explained by residual CFTR function when measurements are taken in later life.
  The objective of this study was to determine whether genetic polymorphisms in enzymes that metabolize oxidative agents modify the individual susceptibility to develop asbestos and smoking related pleuropulmonary changes. Nine polymorphisms of six genes (EPHX1, GSTM1, GSTM3, GSTP1, GSTT1, and NAT2) were genotyped from 1008 Finnish asbestos-exposed workers. The genotype data was compared to signs of lung fibrosis and pleural thickenings, as well as with total lung capacity (TLC), single breath diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DL,CO), and specific diffusing capacity (DL,CO/VA). The GSTT1 deletion polymorphism was associated with fibrotic changes (p=0.003), DL,CO (p=0.02), and DL,CO/VA (p=0.002), and the GSTM1 deletion polymorphism with the greatest thickness of pleural plaques (p=0.009). In further analysis, the GSTT1 null genotype was found to pose over three-fold risk for severe fibrotic changes (OR 3.12, 95% CI 1.51-6.43) and around 2-fold risks for decreased DL,CO (OR 1.77, 95% CI 1.06-2.95) and DL,CO/VA (OR 2.37, 95% CI 1.33-4.23). In addition, the GSTM1 null genotype showed an elevated risk (OR 1.36 95% CI 1.03-1.80) for thicker pleural plaques. Our data suggests that inherited detoxification capacity may affect the development and severity of asbestos and smoking related non-malignant pulmonary changes.
  Mast cells play an essential role in diverse physiological and pathological processes, such as atherosclerosis, malignancy, asthma, pulmonary fibrosis and arthritis, directly interact with bacteria, and appear to play a vital role in host defense against pathogens. Mast cells could be recruited in the inflammatory site, by MCP-1, RANTES and SCF, to selectively secrete proinflammatory molecules; these could include growth factors, histamine, which is mitogenic (H1) and an immunosuppressant (H2), neovascularization agents, such as heparin, IL-8, and VEGF, as well as proteases that could permit new blood vessel formation. Neurogenic inflammation involves vasodilation and plasma protein extravasation in response to neural stimulation. Upon stimulation, sensory neurons release Substance P and other neuropeptides and activate neurokinin-1 receptors leading to plasma protein extravasation from post-capillary venules. Substance P is a neuropeptide that is released from nerve endings in many tissues and plays an important role in immunological and inflammatory states, and it is also a mediator of tissue injury, asthma, arthritis, allergy and autoimmune diseases. SP-positive nerve fibers and mast cell contacts are increased by acute stress in mice leading to dermal mast cell degranulation. VEGF is produced by flammatory cells. IL-33 is the newest inflammatory member of the IL-1 cytokine family and we show here that SP can induce VEGF secretion from mast cells and IL-33 augments the effect of SP in VEGF transcription and translation protein.
  Pulmonary fibrosis is characterized by progressive worsening of pulmonary function leading to a high incidence of death. Currently, however, there has been little progress in therapeutic strategies for pulmonary fibrosis. There have been several reports on cytokines being associated with lung fibrosis, including interleukin (IL)-6 and transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1. We reported recently that two substances (ATRA and thalidomide) have preventive effects on pulmonary fibrosis by inhibiting IL-6-dependent proliferation and TGF-β1-dependent transdifferentiation of lung fibroblasts. Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic autoimmune disorder, and its pathogenesis is also characterized by an association with several cytokines. It has been reported that calpain, a calcium-dependent intracellular cysteine protease, plays an important role in the progression of rheumatoid arthritis. In this study, we examined the preventive effect of Calpeptin, a calpain inhibitor, on bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis. We performed histological examinations and quantitative measurements of IL-6, TGF-β1, collagen type Iα1 and angiopoietin-1 in bleomycin-treated mouse lung tissues with or without the administration of Calpeptin. Calpeptin histologically ameliorated bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis in mice. Calpeptin decreased the expression of IL-6, TGF-β1, angiopoietin-1 and collagen type Iα1 mRNA in mouse lung tissues. In vitro studies disclosed that Calpeptin reduced (i) production of IL-6, TGF-β1, angiopoietin-1 and collagen synthesis from lung fibroblasts; and (ii) both IL-6-dependent proliferation and angiopoietin-1-dependent migration of the cells, which could be the mechanism underlying the preventive effect of Calpeptin on pulmonary fibrosis. These data suggest the clinical use of Calpeptin for the prevention of pulmonary fibrosis.
  Ionizing radiation causes DNA damage and consequent apoptosis, mainly due to the production of hydroxyl radicals that follows radiolytic splitting of water. However, superoxide and hydrogen peroxide also form and induce oxidative stress with resulting lysosomal membrane permeabilization (LMP) arising from iron-catalyzed oxidative events. The latter will significantly contribute to radiation-induced cell death and its degree largely depends on the quantities of lysosomal redox-active iron present as a consequence of autophagy and endocytosis of iron-rich compounds. Therefore, radiation sensitivity might be depressed by lysosome-targeted iron-chelators. Here we show that cells in culture are significantly protected from ionizing radiation damage if initially exposed to the lipophilic iron-chelator salicylaldehyde isonicotinoyl hydrazone (SIH), and that this effect is based on SIH-dependent lysosomal stabilization against oxidative stress. According to its dose-response-modifying effect, SIH is a most powerful radio-protector and a promising candidate for clinical application, mainly to reduce the radiation sensitivity of normal tissue. We propose, as an example, that inhalation of SIH prior to each irradiation session by patients undergoing treatment for lung malignancies would protect normally aerated lung tissue against life-threatening pulmonary fibrosis, while the sensitivity of malignant lung tumors, which usually are non-aerated, will not be affected by inhaled SIH.
  A dog model has been used to evaluate histological changes arising from senescence. Autopsies of 145 Portuguese Water Dogs have been used to evaluate the individual and group "state of health" at time of death. For each dog, weights or dimensions of organs or tissues were obtained, together with histological evaluation of tissues. Twenty-three morphological metrics correlated significantly to age at death. Many of these involved muscles; others were associated with derivatives of embryonic foregut. The latter included lengths of the small intestine and trachea as well as weights of the stomach and some lung lobes. Nearly all of the dogs examined had histological changes in multiple tissues, ranging from two to 12 per dog. Associations among pathologies included inflammatory bowel disease with osteoporosis and dental calculus/periodontitis with atherosclerosis and amyloidosis. In addition, two clusters of histological changes were correlated to aging: hyperplasia, frequency of adenomas, and hemosiderosis constituted one group; inflammation, plasmacytic and lymphocytic infiltration, fibrosis, and atrophy, another. Heritability analysis indicated that many of the changes in tissue/organ morphology or histology could be heritable and possibly associated with IGF1, but more autopsies will be required to substantiate these genetic relationships.
  Survival of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in cystic fibrosis (CF) chronic infections is based on a genetic adaptation process consisting of mutations in specific genes, which can produce advantageous phenotypic switches and ensure its persistence in the lung. Among these, mutations inactivating the regulators MucA (alginate biosynthesis), LasR (quorum sensing) and MexZ (multidrug-efflux pump MexXY) are the most frequently observed, with those inactivating the DNA mismatch repair system (MRS) being also highly prevalent in P. aeruginosa CF isolates, leading to hypermutator phenotypes that could contribute to this adaptive mutagenesis by virtue of an increased mutation rate. Here, we characterized the mutations found in the mucA, lasR, mexZ and MRS genes in P. aeruginosa isolates obtained from Argentinean CF patients, and analyzed the potential association of mucA, lasR and mexZ mutagenesis with MRS-deficiency and antibiotic resistance. Thus, 38 isolates from 26 chronically infected CF patients were characterized for their phenotypic traits, PFGE genotypic patterns, mutations in the mucA, lasR, mexZ, mutS and mutL gene coding sequences and antibiotic resistance profiles. The most frequently mutated gene was mexZ (79%), followed by mucA (63%) and lasR (39%) as well as a high prevalence (42%) of hypermutators being observed due to loss-of-function mutations in mutL (60%) followed by mutS (40%). Interestingly, mutational spectra were particular to each gene, suggesting that several mechanisms are responsible for mutations during chronic infection. However, no link could be established between hypermutability and mutagenesis in mucA, lasR and mexZ, indicating that MRS-deficiency was not involved in the acquisition of these mutations. Finally, although inactivation of mucA, lasR and mexZ has been previously shown to confer resistance/tolerance to antibiotics, only mutations in MRS genes could be related to an antibiotic resistance increase. These results help to unravel the mutational dynamics that lead to the adaptation of P. aeruginosa to the CF lung.
  OBJECTIVE: Several lines of evidence suggest that the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is of major importance in the pathogenesis of SSc. Protein and lipid damage have previously been demonstrated, but scarce data are available on oxidative damage to DNA. In patients with SSc, we evaluated levels of 8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine (8-oxodG), the main validated biomarker of endogenous oxidative damage to DNA, compared to levels of F2-isoprostane, a product of free radical-mediated peroxidation of arachidonic acid. METHODS: Urinary levels of 8-oxodG and 8-isoprostaglandin-F2α (8-iso-PGF2α) were determined by competitive ELISA method in consecutive SSc patients and controls matched for age and sex. RESULTS: We included 80 unrelated SSc patients (72 women, mean age 56 ± 11 yrs) and 39 controls (33 women, mean age 64 ± 8 yrs). Urinary levels of 8-oxodG/creat and 8-iso-PGF2α/creat in SSc patients were found to be higher than in controls (6.5 ng/mg vs 3.7 ng/mg, p = 0.0001; and 11.4 ng/mg vs 4.2 ng/mg, p < 0.0001). In multivariate analysis, 8-oxodG levels were associated with the presence of pulmonary fibrosis on computerized tomography scan, decreased forced vital capacity, and decreased DLCO/alveolar volume. In patients with the diffuse cutaneous subset, a modified Rodnan skin score > 14 was independently associated with 8-oxodG levels. In SSc, 8-oxodG and 8-iso-PGF2α values were correlated (r = 0.32; p = 0.005). CONCLUSION: Our study confirmed marked oxidative stress in SSc. We also found increased values of 8-oxodG in SSc patients and a relevant association with a fibrotic phenotype. The predictive value of this marker and its potential influence on fibrotic disturbances remain to be determined.
  OBJECTIVE: Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a rare connective tissue disease in childhood. We compared the characteristics of adult patients with juvenile-onset SSc (jSSc) from a single-center cohort to an adult-onset group. METHODS: Patients with disease onset before the age of 17 years were included in the jSSc cohort, while subjects with SSc onset after age 17 formed the adult-onset cohort. RESULTS: We identified 52 adult subjects with jSSc and compared them to 954 patients with adult-onset SSc. The mean ± SD age at disease onset of the patients with jSSc was 14 ± 2 years, 39 (75%) of them were women, and 24 (46%) had the diffuse cutaneous subset of SSc (dcSSc). There were no differences between the 2 cohorts in terms of sex and disease subset. Overlaps were significantly more frequent among the jSSc cohort (37%) compared to the adult-onset group (18%; p = 0.002). Autoantibody analysis demonstrated significantly more antitopoisomerase I antibody-positive subjects (33% vs 20%; p = 0.034) and significantly fewer anticentromere antibody-positive subjects (2% vs 25%; p < 0.001) in the jSSc cohort. Compared to the adult-onset group at 10 years from disease onset, survival was significantly higher among the subjects with jSSc (98% vs 75%; p = 0.001), pulmonary arterial hypertension had a significantly lower incidence (2% vs 14%; p = 0.032), and there was no difference in terms of pulmonary fibrosis (22% vs 21%) and cardiac scleroderma (3% vs 2%) between the 2 groups. CONCLUSION: The high survival rates and lower proportion of dcSSc in the adult jSSc cohort may represent a survival bias.
  Staphylococcus aureus colonizes the lungs of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients and despite treatment with antibiotics results in recurrent and relapsing infections. With increasing duration of the infection, the bacterial population is exposed more and more to changing selective pressures exerted by the host immune system, to frequent therapeutic interventions, and to interference with other microorganisms. S. aureus has evolved a variety of strategies to adapt to these challenges: Recombination and mutation provide the population with a preselected heterogeneity, resulting in an inheritable shift of phenotypic traits. This includes the emergence of isolates with mutations in metabolic (e.g. small-colony variants) and regulatory (e.g. agr mutants) genes. Additionally, phages become mobilized with a higher frequency during infection, raising the propensity for recombination. On the other hand, S. aureus can also adapt to the CF lung using regulatory mechanisms which are not well understood in this context. The quorum-sensing system agr is not activated during lung infection in CF, which is consistent with a proposed biofilm mode of growth in the lungs and also with the observation that in CF patients the organism usually remains localized in the lungs without systemic manifestation. Altogether, adaptive processes result in the generation of a heterogeneous S. aureus population in the CF lung which is highly protected against antibiotic therapy, expressing factors necessary for persistence rather than virulence.
  One of the first pathogens which can be isolated from the airways of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients is Staphylococcus aureus, which often persists in this hostile environment for many months or even years. The increase in infections due to the methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) worldwide and even more the emergence of community-acquired MRSA, which differ from nosocomial MRSA by lack of multiresistance and carriage of a phage-encoded toxin, Panton-Valentine leukocidin, attracts new attention to the epidemiology, pathogenesis, and impact of S. aureus in the background of CF. In this review, recent data and studies will be reported and discussed to give an overview of the latest research.
  BACKGROUND: The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) alters the presentation of pulmonary tuberculosis (PTB), but it remains unclear whether alterations occur at a CD4 cell threshold or throughout HIV infection. OBJECTIVE: To better understand the relationship between CD4 count and clinical and radiographic presentation of PTB. SETTING AND DESIGN: Initial presentations of culture-confirmed PTB patients evaluated at a Ugandan national TB referral center and an affiliated research unit were compared by HIV status and across 11 CD4 cell count strata: 0-50 to >500 cells/μl. RESULTS: A total of 873 HIV-infected PTB cases were identified. Among HIV-infected PTB cases with CD4 < 50, 21% had a normal chest X-ray (CXR) vs. 2% with CD4 > 500, with a continuous trend across CD4 strata (test for trend, P < 0.001). All radiographic manifestations of PTB displayed significant trends across CD4 strata. HIV-infected vs. non-HIV-infected patients had no significant difference in CXR findings of miliary patterns or pleural effusion at CD4 > 100, normal CXR or fibrosis at CD4 > 150, adenopathy at CD4 > 250, and cavitation or upper lung disease at CD4 > 300. Twenty-three per cent of co-infected cases with CD4 < 50 and 1% with CD4 > 500 had negative acid-fast bacilli (AFB) smears, with a significant trend between (P < 0.001). CONCLUSION: Variations in CXR appearance and AFB smear correlate with CD4 decline in significant, continuous trends.
  HISTORY AND ADMISSION FINDINGS: A 36-year-old woman presented with dyspnea, dry cough and severe chest pain. She had been treated for persistent shoulder pain for several months. Clinical findings were non-conclusive. Lactate dehydrogenase was slightly elevated, C-reactive protein was increased. INVESTIGATIONS: A chest X-ray and subsequent computed tomography (CT) scans showed a lesion measuring 10×8 cm in the right upper pulmonary lobe. A CT-guided biopsy was obtained and the histological examination revealed a dense lymphocytic infiltrate with abundant blasts in addition to areas of necrosis and fibrosis. These findings were consistent with lymphomatoid granulomatosis grade III. TREATMENT AND COURSE: After 6 cycles of rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristin and prednisolone (R-CHOP), an early relapse developed which was treated with rituximab, ifosphamid, methotrexate and etoposide. Good partial remission was achieved after consolidating high-dose chemotherapy followed by autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT). After two years of rituximab maintenance treatment positron emission tomography (PET-CT) revealed an increase of metabolic activity. A second high-dose therapy was then combined with Y-90 ibritumomab tiuxetan, which was well tolerated. During remission the previously present lymphoma lesion of the lung was resected. Histology did not reveal any residual active lymphomatoid granulomatosis. Complete remission has so far been maintained for one year after ASCT. CONCLUSIONS: Combination of Y-90 ibritumomab tiuxetan and high-dose chemotherapy followed by ASCT may offer an efficacious and well-tolerated targeted treatment approach for patients with relapsed lymphomatoid granulomatosis.
  Airways inflammation, a pathological hallmark of asthma, is associated with the recruitment of pro-inflammatory and inflammatory cells like eosinophils, polymorphonuclear leucocytes cells, mononuclear cells, macrophages, epithelial desquamation, and airways remodeling with sub-epithelial fibrosis. Activated inflammatory cells along with the resident cells can generate pro-inflammatory mediators including oxidants such as superoxide radicals, reactive oxygen species (ROS), and reactive nitrogen species. One of such inflammatory mediator that has received considerable attention is the nitric oxide (NO(•)) generated by pulmonary macrophageal/epithelial cells. In this study, we have explored that systemic monocytes also get activated in asthma to produce oxidants like ROS and NO(•). We estimated the NO(•) production, nitric oxide synthase (NOS) activity, inducible NOS (iNOS) mRNA levels and total free radical activity (TFRA) in blood monocytes of healthy control subjects, untreated asthmatic patients, patients on corticosteroid for less than 6 months and patients on corticosteroid for more than 6 months. Increase in NOS activity, NO(•) levels, and TFRA was observed in monocytes of asthmatic patients. The increase was found to be associated with the transcriptional upregulation of iNOS gene and severity of disease. Highest values of NOS activity, NO(•), and iNOS mRNA were found in the patients with acute asthma. Corticosteroid administration was found to be effective in reversing the induction of iNOS mRNA levels, NOS activity and NO(•) levels. Corticosteroids controlled asthma appears to have association with NOS, NO(•), and TFRA in systemic monocytes of the patients.
  The fourth AACR Special Conference on The Role of Telomeres and Telomerase in Cancer Research was held February 27 to March 2, 2010 in Fort Worth, TX. The meeting was organized to bring together those interested in the basic molecular mechanisms that govern telomere dynamics and stability with those interested in the clinical implications of telomere dysfunction and the use of telomeres and telomerase as therapeutic targets. The meeting was extremely successful as evidenced by the attendance and quality of the presentations. Indeed, several important themes emerged including (a) the intricate connection between the DNA replication and repair machineries in basic telomere replication and stability, (b) the complex interplay between the telomere-specific shelterin components and DNA repair proteins, (c) the nontelomeric functions of TERT in numerous cell types including stem cells, (d) a growing appreciation for the connection that exists between telomere maintenance deficiency states and diverse conditions such as idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and hematopoietic malignancies, and (e) the successful progression of agents targeting telomerase directly and immunologically to phase III clinical trials. Evident at the meeting was the vibrant energy that permeates the telomere field and the important biological and medical findings that it continues to yield.
  Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease has now been definitely associated with pulmonary symptoms and diseases, such as asthma, cough, chronic bronchitis, pneumonia, and pulmonary fibrosis; otolaryngologic symptoms and findings include hoarseness, pharyngitis, cough, laryngitis, subglottic stenosis, globus, and laryngeal cancer. Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease is also associated with noncardiac chest pain, dental erosion, sinusitis and sleep apnoea. This discussion focuses on some of these extra-oesophageal presentations of gastro-oesophageal reflux disease and the general management of these individuals.
  Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is an interstitial lung disease (ILD) affecting the pulmonary interstitium. Other forms of interstitial lung disease exist, and in some cases, an environmental etiology can be delineated. The diagnosis of IPF is typically established by high-resolution CT scan. IPF tends to have a worse prognosis than other forms of ILD. Familial cases of IPF also exist, suggesting a genetic predisposition; telomerase mutations have been observed to occur in familial IPF, which may also explain the increase in IPF with advancing age. Alveolar epithelial cells are believed to be the primary target of environmental agents that have been putatively associated with IPF. These agents may include toxins, viruses, or the autoantibodies found in collagen vascular diseases. The mechanism of disease is still unclear in IPF, but aberrations in fibroblast differentiation, activation, and proliferation may play a role. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition may also be an important factor in the pathogenesis, as it may lead to accumulation of fibroblasts in the lung and a disruption of normal tissue structure. Abnormalities in other components of the immune system, including T cells, B cells, and dendritic cells, as well as the development of ectopic lymphoid tissue, have also been observed to occur in IPF and may play a role in the stimulation of fibrosis that is a hallmark of the disease. It is becoming increasingly clear that the pathogenesis of IPF is indeed a complex and convoluted process that involves numerous cell types and humoral factors.
  OBJECTIVES: To test the presumption that Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates responsible for initial lung infection in individuals with cystic fibrosis (CF) are invariably susceptible to antipseudomonal agents. METHODS: Antibiotic susceptibility was determined (MIC and Etest) in two populations of P. aeruginosa associated with initial lung infection. Population 1: environmental isolates (n=78). Population 2: clinical isolates responsible for first infection in previously non-infected patients (85 isolates from 85 patients). Susceptibility or resistance was determined using current BSAC guidelines; ninth version (2009). RESULTS: The majority (≥ 90%) of isolates in both bacterial populations were susceptible to the front-line antipseudomonal agents; colistin, ciprofloxacin, tobramycin, ceftazidime, amikacin and meropenem. Up to 10% of isolates were resistant to one or more antibiotics. A single isolate from each population would be defined as resistant to tobramycin based on a breakpoint (>128 mg/L) that has been suggested for use in patients receiving inhaled therapy. CONCLUSIONS: The high prevalence of susceptibility found in P. aeruginosa isolates associated with initial infection contrasts with the high prevalence of resistance found in isolates from chronic CF lung infection. However, susceptibility in early isolates cannot be presumed. Until further data are obtained from clinically based studies, susceptibility tests should continue to be performed to assist the choice of antibiotics for treatment of early infection.
  Hypermutable (or mutator) microorganisms are those that have an increased spontaneous mutation rate due to defects in DNA repair or error avoidance systems. Over last decade, several studies have provided strong evidence of a relevant role of mutators in the evolution of natural bacterial populations, with a special emphasis in the field of infectious diseases. Among them, chronic respiratory infection by Pseudomonas aeruginosa in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients was the first natural environment revealing a high prevalence and important role of mutators. High frequencies of mutators have also been noted for other pathogens in the CF setting, particularly Staphylococcus aureus and Haemophilus influenzae. In addition to a strong statistical link between hypermutation and antibiotic resistance (i.e., mutators are more frequently resistant against antibiotics) obtained from the analysis of collections of clinical isolates from CF patients, several in vitro and in vivo experiments have further highlighted the dramatic consequences of hypermutation, especially when acting on microorganisms that are genetically equipped to acquire efficient resistance to most antibiotics by mutations in chromosomal genes such as P. aeruginosa. Recent studies additionally showed that mutators accelerate genetic adaptation of P. aeruginosa to the airways of CF patients and that patients infected by mutator strains have a poorer lung function. Further prospective clinical studies are nevertheless needed for a deep evaluation of the impact of mutators in disease progression and outcome. Future research should particularly focus on the investigation of the optimal therapeutical strategies to prevent the emergence of mutator strains in the lungs of CF patients and to avoid multiple-antimicrobial resistance development if they have already been selected.
  INTRODUCTION: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a multi-organ inflammatory disorder associated with high cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. We sought to assess cardiac involvement using a comprehensive cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (cMRI) approach and to determine its association with disease characteristics in RA patients without symptomatic cardiac disease. METHODS: RA patients with no history and/or clinical findings of systemic or pulmonary hypertension, coronary artery disease, severe valvular heart disease, atrial fibrillation, diabetes mellitus, or echocardiographic abnormalities underwent contrast-enhanced cMRI on a 1.5T scanner. Adenosine triphosphate was used to assess perfusion defects due to microvascular impairment or ischemia, and delayed enhanced imaging was obtained for the assessment of myocardial inflammation/fibrosis. We explored the associations of cMRI abnormalities with RA disease activity and severity measures. RESULTS: Eighteen patients (78% female) with a mean age of 57 +/- 10 years were studied. Eight patients (45%) demonstrated a myocardial abnormality. Perfusion defects under pharmacologic stress were seen in two patients (11%), one of whom had a circumferential subendocardial perfusion defect and one had a non-segmental subendocardial perfusion defect. Seven patients (39%) were found to have delayed enhancement, only one of whom also demonstrated a perfusion defect. Mean disease activity score (DAS)28 was significantly higher in the group with delayed enhancement compared to the group without by an average of 1.32 DAS28 units (4.77 vs. 3.44 units, respectively; P=0.011). Corresponding trends to statistical significance were noted in systemic inflammatory markers, with both C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) quantitatively higher in the group with delayed enhancement. Other RA characteristics, such as disease duration, autoantibody status, and current treatments were not significantly associated with cardiac involvement. CONCLUSIONS: Myocardial abnormalities, as detected by cMRI, were frequent in RA patients without known cardiac disease. Abnormal cMRI findings were associated with higher RA disease activity, suggesting a role for inflammation in the pathogenesis of myocardial involvement in RA.
  BACKGROUND: Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are disorders of the lung parenchyma. They share the common denominators of a progressive nature and poor prognosis. The goal was to use non-biased proteomics to discover new markers for these diseases. METHODS: Proteomics of fibrotic vs. control lung tissue suggested decreased levels of several spots in the lung specimens of IPF patients, which were identified as Hemoglobin (Hb) α and β monomers and Hbα complexes. The Hbα and β monomers and complexes were investigated in more detail in normal lung and lung specimens of patients with IPF and COPD by immunohistochemistry, morphometry and mass spectrometry (MS). RESULTS: Both Hb monomers, in normal lung, were expressed especially in the alveolar epithelium. Levels of Hbα and β monomers and complexes were reduced/lost in IPF but not in the COPD lungs when compared to control lung. MS-analyses revealed Hbα modification at cysteine105 (Cysα105), preventing formation of the Hbα complexes in the IPF lungs. Hbα and Hbβ were expressed as complexes and monomers in the lung tissues, but were secreted into the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and/or induced sputum supernatants as complexes corresponding to the molecular weight of the Hb tetramer. CONCLUSIONS: The abundant expression of the oxygen carrier molecule Hb in the normal lung epithelium and its decline in IPF lung are new findings. The loss of Hb complex formation in IPF warrants further studies and may be considered as a disease-specific modification.
  Aztreonam is a monobactam antibacterial with bactericidal activity against a wide range of aerobic Gram-negative bacteria, including Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Aztreonam lysine for inhalation solution (AZLI) does not contain the potentially inflammatory component arginine, which is used as a buffer in the intravenous formulation. Two phase III, randomized, placebo-controlled trials (AIR-CF1 and AIR-CF2) have been completed with AZLI in cystic fibrosis patients with pulmonary P. aeruginosa infection. In AIR-CF1, respiratory symptoms were significantly improved with AZLI compared with placebo, as assessed by the respiratory symptoms domain of the Cystic Fibrosis Questionnaire-Revised, a disease-specific, patient-reported outcome instrument. The mean treatment effect exceeded the minimal clinically important difference. In AIR-CF2, AZLI was compared with placebo following a 28-day course of tobramycin inhalation solution. AZLI was associated with a significant delay in the need for inhaled or intravenous antipseudomonal antibacterials, as determined by the presence of one of four predefined symptoms shown to be predictive of pulmonary exacerbations. An open-label extension of these trials (AIR-CF3) also demonstrated clinical efficacy with repeated courses of AZLI over 18 months and was not associated with sustained reductions in P. aeruginosa susceptibility. AZLI was also associated with improved pulmonary function and reductions in P. aeruginosa density in sputum in clinical trials. The tolerability profile of AZLI was generally similar to that of placebo in randomized controlled trials, with respiratory symptoms being the most frequently reported adverse events.
  In N. America, over the past decade, various airway clearance techniques (ACT) have been introduced for the treatment of cystic fibrosis (CF). We hypothesized that autogenic drainage (AD), an ACT developed in Belgium would be as effective as postural drainage with percussion (PD) in treating patients with CF.METHODS: Thirty-six CF patients, aged 12-18 years, with Shwachman score 65-98, were enrolled in a 2-year cross-over trial. Patients were matched as pairs and members of each pair were randomly assigned to two groups. For the first study year, Group A performed PD while Group B performed AD. At the end of 1 year Groups A and B crossed over physiotherapy techniques. Clinical status and pulmonary function (FVC, FEV(1), FEF(25-75)) were measured at 3 monthly intervals. Only results from the first year of the study are reported, as 10 out of 17 patients who had completed performing AD for the first year refused to change back to PD for the second year. RESULTS: During the first year of the study, both the AD and PD groups demonstrated improved pulmonary function with no significant difference between the two groups. Change in FVC and FEV(1) percent predicted for Groups A and B was 0.47 ± 1.65(se) versus 2.35 ± 1.51(se) and 2.09 ± 2.2(se) versus 0.92 ± 2.25(se). However, CF patients exhibited a marked preference for the AD technique. Results suggest that both AD and PD are effective methods of performing physiotherapy for CF patients and that the benefits of either technique are enhanced by measures which encourage adherence. Pediatr. Pulmonol. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
  OBJECTIVE: To use clinical and spirometry findings in order to distinguish between the restrictive and nonspecific patterns of pulmonary function test results in patients with low FVC and a normal or elevated FEV1/FVC ratio. METHODS: We analyzed the pulmonary function test results of 211 adult patients submitted to spirometry and lung volume measurements. We used the clinical diagnosis at the time spirometry was ordered, together with various functional data, in order to distinguish between patients presenting with a "true" restrictive pattern (reduced TLC) and those presenting with a nonspecific pattern (normal TLC). RESULTS: In the study sample, TLC was reduced in 144 cases and was within the normal range in 67. The most common causes of a nonspecific pattern were obstructive disorders, congestive heart failure, obesity, bronchiolitis, interstitial diseases, and neuromuscular disorders. In patients given a working diagnosis of pulmonary fibrosis, pleural disease, or chest wall disease, the positive predictive value (PPV) for restriction was >or= 90%. In males, an FVC <or= 60% of predicted had a PPV for restriction of 98.8%. In females, the restrictive pattern was found in 84.4% of those with an FVC <or= 50% of predicted. A difference of >or= 0% between the FEV1% and the FVC% had a PPV for restriction of 89.5%. After performing logistic regression, we developed a point scale for predicting the restrictive pattern. CONCLUSIONS: In many patients with reduced FEV1, reduced FVC, and a normal FEV1/FVC ratio, the restrictive pattern can be identified with confidence through the use of an algorithm that takes the clinical diagnosis and certain spirometry measurements into account.
  AIM: The examine the cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis in apolipoprotein E-deficient mice (ApoE-/- mice) fed a "Western-style diet" and the effect of simvastatin intervention. METHODS: Male ApoE-/- mice (n=36) were fed a "Western-style diet" from the age of 8 weeks. After 16 weeks, they were randomly given either simvastatin (25 mg·kg⁻¹·d⁻¹) or normal saline (control group) by gavage for 8, 16, or 24 weeks. The left ventricular (LV) wall thickness and diameter of the myocardial cells were determined with Hematoxylin-Eosin stain, and the level of fibrosis of the myocardial matrix was assessed with Masson stain. Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting analysis were used to determine the mRNA and protein expression of matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9), Cathepsin S (Cat S), and the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) in the myocardium of ApoE-/- mice. RESULTS: ApoE-/- mice fed a "Western-style diet" showed an significant age-dependent increase in total cholesterol (TC), LV wall thickness, myocardial cell diameter and LV collagen content (P<0.05). The simvastatin treatment group showed significantly reduced LV wall thickness, myocardial cell diameters and LV collagen content at 40 weeks when compared with the control group (P<0.05). Furthermore, treatment with simvastatin also significantly inhibited the mRNA and protein expressions of MMP-9 and Cat S as well as increased the mRNA and protein expressions of PPAR alpha and PPAR gamma at 32 and 40 weeks compared with the control group (P<0.05). CONCLUSION: ApoE-/- mice fed a "Western-style diet" had cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis, which worsened with age. Simvastatin treatment inhibits the development of cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis, and this effect may be mediated through increased levels of PPAR alpha and PPAR gamma and reduced levels of TC, MMP-9, and Cat S.
  CC chemokines play an important role in the pathogenesis of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). Few studies have evaluated the efficacy of therapeutically targeting CC chemokines and their receptors during interstitial lung diseases. In the present study, the therapeutic effects of Evasin-1, a tick-derived Chemokine-Binding Protein that has high affinity for CCL3/MIP-1α, was investigated in a murine model of bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis. CCL3/MIP-1α concentrations in lung homogenates increased significantly with time after bleomycin challenge and this was accompanied by increased number of leukocytes and elevated levels of CCL2/MCP-1, CCL5/RANTES, TNF-α and TGF-β1 and pulmonary fibrosis. Administration of Evasin-1 in a preventive (from the day of bleomycin administration) or therapeutic (from day 8 after bleomycin) schedule decreased number of leukocytes in the lung, reduced levels of TNF-α and TGF-β1 and attenuated lung fibrosis. These protective effects were similar to those observed in CCL3/MIP-1α -deficient mice (MIP-1α-/-). In conclusion, targeting CCL3/MIP-1α by treatment with Evasin-1 is beneficial in the context of bleomycin-induced lung injury, even when treatment is started after the fibrogenic insult. Mechanistically, Evasin-1 treatment was associated with decreased recruitment of leukocytes and production of fibrogenic cytokines. Modulation of CCL3/MIP-1α function by Evasin-1 could be useful for the treatment of IPF.
  Tenascin-C (TNC) is an extracellular matrix glycoprotein of unknown function that is highly expressed in adult lung parenchyma following acute lung injury (ALI). Here we report that mice lacking TNC are protected from interstitial fibrosis in the bleomycin model of ALI. Three weeks after exposure to bleomycin, TNC-null mice had accumulated 85% less lung collagen than wildtype mice. The lung interstitium of TNC-null mice also appeared to contain fewer myofibroblasts and fewer cells with intranuclear Smad-2/3 staining, suggesting impaired TGF-β activation or signaling. In vitro, TNC-null lung fibroblasts exposed to constitutively active TGF-β expressed less α-smooth muscle actin and deposited less collagen I into the matrix than wildtype cells. Impaired TGF-β responsiveness was correlated with dramatically reduced Smad-3 protein levels and diminished nuclear translocation of Smad-2 and Smad-3 in TGF-β-exposed TNC-null cells. Reduced Smad-3 in TNC-null cells reflects both decreased transcript abundance and enhanced ubiquitin-proteasome mediated protein degradation. Together, these studies suggest that TNC is essential for maximal TGF-β action after ALI. The clearance of TNC that normally follows ALI may restrain TGF-β action during lung healing, while prolonged or exaggerated TNC expression may facilitate TGF-β action and fibrosis after ALI.
  Adverse reactions to antibiotics in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) are a growing concern. We report the case of a pediatric patient with CF with multiple comorbidities and a history of drug reactions, who developed life-threatening piperacillin-induced immune hemolytic anemia. We review drug-induced hemolytic anemia (DIIHA) in particular, and antibiotic hypersensitivity in CF in general, including the frequency, pathogenesis, and risk factors. Finally, we discuss the treatment options and propose an algorithm for the management of drug-induced hypersensitivity reactions in patients with CF.
  OBJECTIVE: To investigate the adaptive responses of an in-patient exercise program in children with cystic fibrosis (CF) and evaluate the effects of sex. STUDY DESIGN: In total, 158 female and 186 male subjects with CF (age, 12 to 43 years) were studied during a 6-week rehabilitation course. A maximal incremental cycling test was used to determine exercise capacity and responses after 6 weeks of exercise training. Measures included lung function, peak oxygen uptake, peak workload, and peak heart rate. RESULTS: Lung function values were lower in males (P < .05). Females had a lower aerobic capacity (P < .05) at the beginning and at the end of the exercise training program. Similar training effects (P > .05) were seen between sexes in peak oxygen uptake (mL/min, mL/kg/min) and peak heart rate (beats/min) but not in peak workload (Watts, W/kg). CONCLUSIONS: The exercise program improved the fitness level similarly in females and males with CF. Basic physiological sex differences were still seen at the beginning and end of the training, despite the better lung function in females. Moreover, the finding suggested that fitness level and not lung function determined the response to training in CF, with those who were less fit at baseline having the largest response to training.
  BACKGROUND: As more patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) reach adulthood and participate in age-appropriate activities (e.g. employment, dating), disclosure of medical status becomes more important. This study assessed rates of disclosure and its perceived impact on relationships using the Adult Data for Understanding Lifestyle and Transitions (ADULT) online survey. METHODS: Adults with CF participated in the survey via the United States national network of CF Centers. Descriptive and inferential statistics were utilized. RESULTS: Participants (n = 865) were more likely to disclose to relatives (94%) and close friends (81%) than to dating partners (73%), bosses/supervisors/teachers (51%) or co-workers (39%). Respondents generally reported a neutral/positive effect on relationships following disclosure. Negative effects of disclosure were infrequent, but more likely with dating partners or bosses/supervisors/teachers. Results also indicated that disclosure may be influenced by severity of lung disease and gender, with those having normal/mild lung disease less likely to disclose their diagnosis to both co-workers (p < 0.01) and bosses/supervisors/teachers (p < 0.01), and women being more likely to disclose to close friends (p < 0.0001) and dating partners (p < 0.05) than men. CONCLUSIONS: Most adults with CF disclosed their disease to relatives and close friends. Individuals with severe CF lung disease were more likely to disclose their diagnosis to coworkers and supervisors/teachers. It may be helpful to provide support for disclosure of disease in situations such as employment and dating.
  Burkholderia cepacia complex (Bcc) is a group of Gram-negative pulmonary pathogens associated with life-threatening infections in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). The airway epithelium plays a crucial role in the initiation and modulation of inflammatory responses to these pathogens. Interleukin (IL)-8 released from epithelial cells is a potent chemoattractant for neutrophils. The aims of this study were to compare the IL-8 response to Bcc infection in different epithelial cell types and to investigate the impact of IL-8 on Bcc growth and intracellular survival. To compare epithelial cell IL-8 responses, 4 human epithelial cell lines were used in the study; A549 cells, an alveolar epithelial cell line, Calu-3 cells, a sub-bronchial epithelial cell line, 16HBE14o- cells, and CFBE41o- cells, which are CFTR-positive and CFTR-negative bronchial epithelial cell lines, respectively. Two B. multivorans and 2 B. cenocepacia strains all induced a significant IL-8 response by 12h and further increased in all cell lines at 24h. Furthermore, the levels of IL-8 from Calu-3 and A549 cells were approximately 3 times that of 16HBE14o- or CFBE41o- cells. In 2 of the cell lines examined (16HBE14o- and CFBE41o-), B. cenocepacia LMG 16656 (J2315), an epidemic strain, induced greater levels of IL-8 (P<0.01) compared to other Bcc strains tested. The CFTR-positive and -negative cell lines secreted similar levels of IL-8 indicating a CFTR-independent induction of IL-8. However, the CFTR-negative cells did secrete constitutive levels of IL-8 greater than that of CFTR-positive cells. An investigation of the effect of IL-8 on Bcc extracellular and intracellular growth found that at low concentrations (<10ng/ml) of recombinant human (rh) IL-8, the growth of B. cenocepacia LMG 16656 and B. multivorans LMG 13010 was enhanced, whereas at higher concentrations (10ng/ml), growth of both strains was significantly reduced. Growth of both non-CF Bcc strains remained unchanged in the presence of rhIL-8. In contrast to extracellular growth, higher concentrations (10ng/ml) of rhIL-8 enhance the intracellular growth and survival of both LMG 16656 and LMG 13010 in 16HBE14o- and CFBE41o- cell lines. Although LMG 13010 uptake by epithelial cells was higher than LMG 16656 (P<0.01), the intracellular growth of LMG 16656 is greater than LMG 13010 (P<0.05). These studies demonstrated that the type of epithelial cells encountered by Bcc strains determines the extent of the IL-8 responses triggered and that this cytokine in addition to its well-established proinflammatory properties can enhance both the extracellular and intracellular growth of Bcc strains.
  CONTEXT: Intensive treatments intended to sustain life are often used for patients with advanced cystic fibrosis (CF). There are no guidelines for selecting patients whose survival and quality of life may be enhanced by such treatments or for communication with patients and caregivers about possible treatment outcomes. OBJECTIVES: We aimed to describe caregivers' perspectives on decision making for the use of intensive treatments for patients with advanced CF lung disease. METHODS: We conducted semi-structured interviews with 36 caregivers of 36 patients who died of CF about treatment preference discussions and solicited recommendations for improving discussions. RESULTS: Twenty (56%) patients received intensive treatments during the last week of life. Twenty-two (61%) caregivers reported ever having discussed intensive treatment preferences with a physician, and 17 (77%) of these discussions were initiated during an acute illness. Only 14 (39%) of all patients participated. Caregivers expressed less certainty about consistency of treatments with patient preferences when patients did not participate. Twenty-nine (81%) caregivers endorsed first discussing treatment preferences during a period of medical stability. CONCLUSIONS: Discussions about preferences for the use of intensive treatments for patients with CF often take place during episodes of acute illness and may be delayed until patients themselves are too ill to participate. Bereaved caregivers suggest first addressing intensive treatment preferences during a stable period so that patient preferences are understood and unwanted treatments are minimized.
  Lung transplantation has been established as an appropriate ultimate treatment strategy in end-stage lung disease, when all conventional therapeutic options have been exhausted. Acute and potentially reversible lung diseases (ARDS, pneumonia) and malignancy (broncho-alveolar carcinoma) are not established indications. Retrospective analyses on the natural course of the disease and new medical treatment options have led to fewer transplantations in recipients with emphysema and idiopathic pulmonary hypertension. In end-stage cystic fibrosis and patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, alternative treatment options are currently not available and lung transplantation is indicated. The available guidelines for candidate selection should be followed. Internationally, there is a trend towards a benefit-orientated allocation of organs. Recommendations for candidate selection, surgical innovations and, especially, the improved long-term follow-up have led to improved results in the last two decades. Long-term results are, however, still unsatisfactory in comparison to liver and kidney transplantations. The main obstacles to long-term survival and causes of death are chronic allograft dysfunction (bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome, BOS) and infections. In the future, the pathogenesis and treatment options for these two entities should be clarified. A further essential task is to increase the donor pool in the future because the current waiting list mortality is approximately 20 %.
  Sarcoidosis and lung fibrosis were first described by histopathology in the 19th century. Since then a large number of different forms of diffuse parenchymal lung diseases has been identified. Although all these diseases manifest in the lung interstitium, there is a wide range of predominanthy inflammatory to purely fibrotic disease processes. Accordingly, anti-inflammatory treatment is successful in the former, whereas for the latter an effective medical therapy is lacking. Gene technology has recently led to results which have fundamentally changed our understanding of the pathophysiology of fibrosing lung disease. Early and differential diagnosis has much improved with the help of high-resolution computed tomography. Recent clinical trials in patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis have shown at least some effectiveness for the antioxidant treatment approach using high-dosed N-acetylcysteine as well as for the use of pirfenidone. Importantly, these studies have proven that well-designed treatment trials are feasible in this patient population. This has kindled the hope that, based on a better understanding of the pathophysiology, new targeted therapies will prove to be successful in the future.
  Scleroderma is a disease characterized by immune activation, vasculopathy, fibroblast stimulation, and connective tissue fibrosis. End-organ damage occurs due to progressive tissue fibrosis and vasculopathy. Markers of incipient vasculopathy have not been well studied in scleroderma. However, reduced renal functional reserve and proteinuria are common indicators of progressive vasculopathy in diabetic and hypertensive vasculopathy. Recent studies suggest a strong association between renal involvement and outcomes in scleroderma, with a threefold increased risk of mortality from pulmonary hypertension if renal insufficiency is present. We review the types of renal involvement seen in scleroderma and the data to support the use of renal parameters including proteinuria, glomerular filtration rate, and renal vascular dynamics measured with Doppler ultrasound to identify subclinical renal insufficiency. Further studies are warranted to investigate the use of renal parameters as prognostic indicators in scleroderma.
  Pulmonary fibrosis is a progressive and lethal lung disease characterized by accumulation of extracellular matrix and loss of pulmonary function. No cure exists for this pathologic condition, and current treatments often fail to slow its progression or relieve its symptoms. Relaxin was previously shown to induce a matrix degrading phenotype in human lung fibroblasts in vitro and to inhibit pulmonary fibrosis in vivo. A novel peptide which targets the relaxin RXFP1/LGR7 receptor was recently identified using our computational platform designed to predict novel G protein-coupled receptor peptide agonists. In this study, we examined the anti-fibrotic properties of this novel peptide, designated CGEN25009, in human cell based assays and in a murine model of bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis. Similarly to relaxin, CGEN25009 was found to have an inhibitory effect on TGF-β1-induced collagen deposition in human dermal fibroblasts, while enhancing MMP-2 expression. The peptide's biological activity was also similar to relaxin in generating cellular stimulation of cAMP, cGMP and NO in the THP-1 human cell line. In vivo, 2-week administration of CGEN25009 in a preventive or therapeutic mode, i.e. concurrently with or 7 days after bleomycin treatment, respectively, caused a significant reduction of lung inflammation and injury, and ameliorated adverse airway remodeling and peri-bronchial fibrosis. The results of this study indicate that CGEN25009 displays anti-fibrotic and anti-inflammatory properties and may offer a new therapeutic option for the treatment of pulmonary fibrosis.
  Burkholderia cepacia complex (Bcc) is a group of opportunistic cystic fibrosis (CF) pathogens that invade lung epithelial cells. The mechanisms of invasion are poorly understood, in particular, the receptors utilised by this bacterium in the invasion process have not been identified. The aim of this study was to investigate the epithelial receptors involved in the invasion of Bcc isolates. We confirmed that invasion into two lung epithelial cell lines (16HBE14o- and CFBE41o-) which have a non-CF and CF phenotype, respectively, is receptor mediated and showed that pre-treatment of these epithelial cell lines with α- or β-galactosidase reduced invasion of isolates of two species of Bcc, Burkholderia multivorans and Burkholderia cenocepacia. In contrast, removal of mucin had no significant effect. Biotinylated Bcc strains were shown to bind to purified glycolipids separated by thin layer chromatography, albeit different patterns of binding were associated with different strains. Invasion of CF lung epithelial cells (CFBE41o-) by all three Bcc strains examined was significantly reduced by treatment of cells with inhibitors of glycolipid biosynthesis. Although the specific glycolipid involved in each case has not been elucidated, it is apparent that invasion of lung epithelial cells is mediated via binding to glycosphingolipid receptors.
  INTRODUCTION: Although peak expiratory flow rate is the conventional way to measure asthma severity in adults, its use is problematic in children because it is effort dependent. Forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV(1)) and the ratio of FEV(1) to forced vital capacity (FEV(1)/FVC) are more accurate, but generally not available in the emergency department (ED). A better test is needed. Single-breath counting (SBC) is the measurement of how far an individual can count in a normal speaking voice after a maximal effort inhalation. The count is in cadence to a metronome set at 2 beats per second. Previous work has suggested that SBC correlates with standard measures of pulmonary function in adults. However, it has never been tested in children. OBJECTIVES: The aims of this study are to determine if SBC can be easily performed by children and to assess the correlation between SBC and standard measures of pulmonary function in a pediatric population. METHODS: This was a prospective observational study of a convenience sample of children presenting to the pulmonary clinic for scheduled pulmonary function testing (PFT). Peak expiratory flow rate, FEV(1), FVC, forced expiratory flow 25% to 75%, and FEV(1)/FVC were measured and recorded. After PFT, subjects were asked to perform SBC. Three attempts were allowed, and the average was recorded. Correlation was determined by the Pearson coefficient. RESULTS: Sixty-seven children (ages 5-18 years, 64% male) were enrolled. All were able to understand and complete the testing. Indications for PFT included asthma and/or allergies (n = 44), cystic fibrosis (n = 9), and other chronic diseases (n = 14). The correlations (r) of SBC to peak expiratory flow rate, FEV(1), FVC, forced expiratory flow 25% to 75%, and FEV(1)/FVC were 0.55, 0.66, 0.71, 0.44, and -0.29, respectively (P < .05 for all results). CONCLUSION: Single-breath counting is easy to perform in children, seems to correlate well with standard measures of pulmonary function, and shows promise for measuring asthma severity in children. Further work to define the range of reference SBC values (as a function of age and/or body size) and an evaluation of the utility of SBC in an ED population of acute asthmatics is indicated.
  BACKGROUND: Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis is a chronic progressive lung disease with poor outcome and no effective treatment to date. This is an update of a Cochrane Review first published in 2003. OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of non-steroid agents in adults with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Airways Group Register (30 March 2010), the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) (The Cochrane Library, Issue 1, 2010), Ovid MEDLINE to March week 5, 2010, EMBASE to week 13, 2010 and PubMed to April 2010, with additional handsearching, including abstracts of international conferences. We also contacted pharmaceutical companies and researchers in the field. SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised studies comparing non-steroid drugs with placebo or steroids in adults with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two authors independently assessed trial quality, extracted data and assessed risk of bias. We contacted pharmaceutical companies to obtain missing information, if any. We combined survival outcomes using Peto odds ratios or hazard ratios (HR). MAIN RESULTS: Fifteen trials involving 10 different drugs were included. Two trials enrolling 1156 patients compared interferon gamma-1beta with placebo: interferon gamma-1beta did not significantly improve survival (HR 0.88, 95% CI 0.47 to 1.64; P = 0.68). Four trials involving 1155 patients compared pirfenidone with placebo. Three trials, conducted in 1046 patients, provided data on progression-free survival: pirfenidone significantly reduced the risk of disease progression by 30% (HR 0.70, 95% CI 0.56 to 0.88, P = 0.002). Data on the effect of pirfenidone on pulmonary function could only be assessed for two studies analysing 314 patients. Forced vital capacity or vital capacity was significantly improved by pirfenidone (mean difference 0.08 L, 95% CI 0.03 to 0.13, P = 0.0006). AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Based on available data, partly still unpublished, pirfenidone appears to improve progression-free survival and, to a lesser extent, pulmonary function in patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. More data are needed on overall survival and quality of life on treatment. From the studies in this review, interferon gamma-1beta has not been shown to affect survival. Other agents evaluated in single studies either failed to provide evidence for a benefit or need to be assessed in larger randomised controlled trials.
  Not all patients with cystic fibrosis have abnormal sweat chloride levels, severe lung disease, or failure to thrive. These 2 cases remind us to think "outside the box".
  Asbestos is reported to cause pulmonary fibrosis, and its use has been banned. We examined the biopersistence and histopathological effect of rock wool (RW) fibers in rat lungs by a nose-only inhalation exposure study. Twenty-four rats were exposed to RW fibers for 6 h daily for 5 consecutive days. Six rats each were sacrificed shortly and 1, 2, and 4 wk after exposure, and the fiber numbers and sizes in lungs were determined. The fiber number in the lungs 4 wk after exposure significantly decreased. The clearance half time was 28 d for fibers with L > 20 mum and 50 d for World Health Organization fibers. The reasons for the decrease in number and size of fibers include: 1) discharge outside of the body by mucociliary movement, 2) dissolution by body fluid, and 3) phagocytosis and digestion by alveolar macrophages. Twelve rats were used for histopathological examination, and the pathological changes were classified by Wagner's criteria. As a result, changes up to only Grade 2 were observed. The reason for the increase in macrophage number was considered to be a transient reaction of body defense. These results suggest that RW has low biopersistence and only a limited pathological effect.
  Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), a heterogeneous disease with respect to clinical presentation and rates of progression, disproportionately affects older adults. The diagnosis of IPF is descriptive, based on clinical, radiologic, and histopathologic examination, and definitive diagnosis is hampered by poor interobserver agreement and lack of a consensus definition. There are no effective treatments. Cellular, molecular, genetic, and environmental risk factors have been identified for IPF, but the initiating event and the characteristics of preclinical stages are not known. IPF is predominantly a disease of older adults, and the processes underlying normal aging might significantly influence the development of IPF. Yet, the biology of aging and the principles of medical care for this population have been typically ignored in basic, translational, or clinical IPF research. In August 2009, the Association of Specialty Professors, in collaboration with the American College of Chest Physicians, the American Geriatrics Society, the National Institute on Aging, and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, held a workshop, summarized herein, to review what is known, to identify research gaps at the interface of aging and IPF, and to suggest priority areas for future research. Efforts to answer the questions identified will require the integration of geriatrics, gerontology, and pulmonary research, but these efforts have great potential to improve care for patients with IPF.
  The upregulation of nitric oxide (NO) by inflammatory cytokines and mediators in central and peripheral airway sites can be monitored easily in exhaled air. It is now possible to estimate the predominant site of increased fraction of exhaled NO (FeNO) and its potential pathologic and physiologic role in various pulmonary diseases. In asthma, increased FeNO reflects eosinophilic-mediated inflammatory pathways moderately well in central and/or peripheral airway sites and implies increased inhaled and systemic corticosteroid responsiveness. Recently, five randomized controlled algorithm asthma trials reported only equivocal benefits of adding measurements of FeNO to usual clinical guideline management including spirometry; however, significant design issues may exist. Overall, FeNO measurement at a single expiratory flow rate of 50 mL/s may be an important adjunct for diagnosis and management in selected cases of asthma. This may supplement standard clinical asthma care guidelines, including spirometry, providing a noninvasive window into predominantly large-airway-presumed eosinophilic inflammation. In COPD, large/central airway maximal NO flux and peripheral/small airway/alveolar NO concentration may be normal and the role of FeNO monitoring is less clear and therefore less established than in asthma. Furthermore, concurrent smoking reduces FeNO. Monitoring FeNO in pulmonary hypertension and cystic fibrosis has opened up a window to the role NO may play in their pathogenesis and possible clinical benefits in the management of these diseases.
  Indications for thoracic surgery in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) are principally represented by pleural diseases including pneumothorax, pleural effusion, and empyema and by parenchymal lung diseases including bronchiectasis, hemoptysis, and pulmonary abscess. Moreover, lung transplantation has proved a viable therapeutic option for progressive respiratory failure due to end-stage CF. Main surgical experiences in this setting are reviewed and discussed.
  Objective. SSc is an autoimmune disease characterized by fibrosis of the skin and internal organs. Although the aetiology remains uncertain, many reports have suggested that IL-6 is involved in SSc pathogenesis. Tocilizumab, an anti-IL-6 receptor antibody, is an anti-arthritis medicine that works through the blockade of IL-6 functions. To examine the effect of tocilizumab on SSc, we administered tocilizumab to two SSc patients. Methods. Two dcSSc patients were administered tocilizumab at 8 mg/kg once a month for 6 months. One patient had pulmonary fibrosis assessed by CT and spirometry, and the other had chronic renal failure caused by scleroderma renal crisis. Their skin condition was monitored with a Vesmeter and the modified Rodnan total skin score (mRTSS). Skin biopsies were obtained before and after the tocilizumab treatment to investigate the histological changes. Results. After tocilizumab treatment, both patients showed softening of the skin with reductions of 50.7 and 55.7% in the total z-score of Vesmeter hardness and 51.9 and 23.0% in the mRTSS, respectively. Histological examination showed thinning of the collagen fibre bundles in the dermis. The creatinine clearance in the patient with chronic renal failure improved from 38 to 55 ml/min. However, the fibrotic changes in the lung in the other patient remained unchanged. Conclusions. In the two cases of SSc that we report here, softening of the skin was observed during the treatment with tocilizumab.
  BACKGROUND: Gefitinib, an inhibitor of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase, is an effective treatment for epithelial tumors, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and is generally well tolerated. However, some clinical trials revealed that gefitinib exposure caused lung fibrosis, a severe adverse reaction. This study investigated the effect of gefitinib on lung fibrosis in mice. METHODS: We generated a mouse model of lung fibrosis induced by bleomycin to investigate the fibrotic effect of gefitinib. C57BL/6 mice were injected intratracheally with bleomycin or saline, with intragastric administration of gefitinib or saline. Lung tissues were harvested on day 14 or 21 for histology and genetic analysis. RESULTS: The histological results showed that bleomycin successfully induced lung fibrosis in mice, and gefitinib prevented lung fibrosis and suppressed the proliferation of S100A4-positive fibroblast cells. In addition, Western blotting analysis revealed that gefitinib decreased the expression of phosphorylated EGFR (p-EGFR). Furthermore, quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) demonstrated that gefitinib inhibited the accumulation of collagens I and III. CONCLUSIONS: These results reveal that gefitinib reduces pulmonary fibrosis induced by bleomycin in mice and suggest that administration of small molecule EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors has the potential to prevent pulmonary fibrosis by inhibiting the proliferation of mesenchymal cells, and that targeting tyrosine kinase receptors might be useful for the treatment of pulmonary fibrosis in humans.
  Reactive airway disease is often triggered by an upper respiratory viral infection and readily responds to anti-inflammatory and bronchodilator therapy. The differential diagnosis for unresponsive disease includes poorly controlled asthma, noncompliance with medical regimen, vocal cord dysfunction, rhinosinusitis, gastroesophageal reflux disease or recurrent aspiration, foreign body aspiration, allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, Churg-Strauss vasculitis, cardiac disorders such as congestive heart failure or mitral stenosis, or other pulmonary disorders such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, interstitial lung disease, bronchiectasis, sarcoidosis, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, pulmonary embolism, cystic fibrosis, airway neoplasms, or laryngotracheomalacia. As is often the case, a meticulous history can expeditiously direct the clinician to the diagnosis, especially in a patient without a smoking, asthmatic, or atopic history.
  Acute lung injury (ALI) and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) are characterized by non-cardiogenic pulmonary edema, respiratory distress and hypoxemia. Factor VII-activating protease (FSAP) is a plasma-derived protease which inhibits the proliferation and migration of hepatic stellate cells and vascular smooth muscle cells. This study was designed to determine the dynamic expression changes in FSAP in a bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis rat model and the influence of FSAP on human pulmonary fibroblasts (HPF). The expression of FSAP was examined in a rat model of bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis by immunohistochemical staining, quantitative real-time RT-PCR and Western blot analysis. The influence of FSAP on cell proliferation and migration of HPF was investigated by the BrdU incorporation assay and transwell cell culture chambers, respectively. The effect of FSAP on platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-stimulated p42/p44 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) activation on HPF was determined by Western blot analysis. FSAP was observed prominently in alveolar epithelial cells as well as microvascular endothelial cells of the lung parenchyma and was markedly increased at the early phase of bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis, but decreased at the late stage, particularly during the pulmonary fibrosis. FSAP inhibited PDGF-stimulated proliferation, migration, p42/p44 MAPK phosphorylation and collagen III synthesis of the HPF. We concluded that epithelial cells in lungs represent a source of FSAP at the early stage in acutely injured lung. Moreover, we demonstrated an inhibitory effect of FSAP on PDGF-stimulated proliferation and migration of HPF in vitro, suggesting that FSAP may modulate inflammation and exert a beneficial effect on ARDS.
  Upon activation, neutrophils release DNA fibers decorated with antimicrobial proteins, forming neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs). Although NETs are bactericidal and contribute to innate host defense, excessive NET formation has been linked to the pathogenesis of autoinflammatory diseases. However, the mechanisms regulating NET formation, particularly during chronic inflammation, are poorly understood. Here we show that the G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) CXCR2 mediates NET formation. Downstream analyses showed that CXCR2-mediated NET formation was independent of NADPH oxidase and involved Src family kinases. We show the pathophysiological relevance of this mechanism in cystic fibrosis lung disease, characterized by chronic neutrophilic inflammation. We found abundant NETs in airway fluids of individuals with cystic fibrosis and mouse cystic fibrosis lung disease, and NET amounts correlated with impaired obstructive lung function. Pulmonary blockade of CXCR2 by intra-airway delivery of small-molecule antagonists inhibited NET formation and improved lung function in vivo without affecting neutrophil recruitment, proteolytic activity or antibacterial host defense. These studies establish CXCR2 as a receptor mediating NADPH oxidase-independent NET formation and provide evidence that this GPCR pathway is operative and druggable in cystic fibrosis lung disease.
  We have identified a new role for the matrix enzyme lysyl oxidase-like-2 (LOXL2) in the creation and maintenance of the pathologic microenvironment of cancer and fibrotic disease. Our analysis of biopsies from human tumors and fibrotic lung and liver tissues revealed an increase in LOXL2 in disease-associated stroma and limited expression in healthy tissues. Targeting LOXL2 with an inhibitory monoclonal antibody (AB0023) was efficacious in both primary and metastatic xenograft models of cancer, as well as in liver and lung fibrosis models. Inhibition of LOXL2 resulted in a marked reduction in activated fibroblasts, desmoplasia and endothelial cells, decreased production of growth factors and cytokines and decreased transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) pathway signaling. AB0023 outperformed the small-molecule lysyl oxidase inhibitor beta-aminoproprionitrile. The efficacy and safety of LOXL2-specific AB0023 represents a new therapeutic approach with broad applicability in oncologic and fibrotic diseases.
  Several studies have implicated gamma herpesviruses, particularly Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV), in the progression of Idiopathic Pulmoinary Fibrosis (IPF). The data presented here examine the possible role that EBV plays in the potentiation of this disease by evaluating the pulmonary response to expression of the EBV lytic transactivator protein Zta. Expression of Zta in the lungs of mice via adenovirus mediated delivery (Adv-Zta) produced pro-fibrogenic inflammation that appeared most pronounced by day 7 post-exposure. Relative to mice exposed to control GFP-expressing adenovirus (Adv-GFP), mice exposed to Adv-Zta displayed evidence of lung injury and a large increase in inflammatory cells, predominately neutrophils, recovered by bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL). Cytokine and mRNA profiling of the BAL fluid and cells recovered from Adv-Zta-treated mice revealed a Th2 and Th17 bias. mRNA profiles from Adv-Zta-infected lung epithelial cells revealed consistent induction of mRNAs encoding Th2 cytokines. Co-expression in transient assays of wild-type Zta, but not a DNA-binding-defective mutant Zta, activated expression of the IL-13 promoter in lung epithelial cells and detection of IL-13 in Adv-Zta treated mice correlated with expression of Zta. Induction of Th2 cytokines in Zta-expressing mice corresponded with alternative activation of macrophages. In cell culture and in mice, Zta repressed lung epithelial cell markers. Despite the pro-fibrogenic character at day 7, the inflammation resolves by 28 days post-exposure to Adv-Zta without evidence of fibrosis. These observations indicate that the EBV lytic transactiavtor protein Zta displays activity consistent with a pathogenic role in pulmonary fibrosis associated with herpesvirus infection.
  Pseudomonas aeruginosa is an opportunistic pathogen that causes acute, invasive infections in immunocompromised individuals and chronic, persistent respiratory infections in individuals with cystic fibrosis (CF). The differential progression of acute or chronic infections involves the production of distinct sets of virulence factors. P. aeruginosa strains isolated from patients with acute respiratory infection are generally nonencapsulated and express a variety of invasive virulence factors, including flagella, the type III secretion system (T3SS), type IV pili (TFP), and multiple secreted toxins and degradative enzymes. Strains isolated from chronically infected CF patients, however, typically lack expression of invasive virulence factors and have a mucoid phenotype due to the production of an alginate capsule. The mucoid phenotype results from loss-of-function mutations in mucA, which encodes an anti-sigma factor that normally prevents alginate synthesis. Here, we report that the cyclic AMP/Vfr-dependent signaling (CVS) pathway is defective in mucA mutants and that the defect occurs at the level of vfr expression. The CVS pathway regulates the expression of multiple invasive virulence factors, including T3SS, exotoxin A, protease IV, and TFP. We further demonstrate that mucA-dependent CVS inhibition involves the alternative sigma factor AlgU (AlgT) and the response regulator AlgR but does not depend on alginate production. Our findings show that a single naturally occurring mutation leads to inverse regulation of virulence factors involved in acute and persistent infections. These results suggest that mucoid conversion and inhibition of invasive virulence determinants may both confer a selective advantage to mucA mutant strains of P. aeruginosa in the CF lung.
  Neutrophil serine proteases (NSPs) especially elastase are major agents of lung destruction in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. This study investigated SerpinB1, a highly efficient inhibitor of NSPs, in CF lung disease Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) from 31 children with CF and 24 control children were examined for amount and molecular species of SerpinB1, and its mechanism of action was studied. CF BALF had more SerpinB1 than control BALF, 3.9 (2.60 - 5.62) mug/ml (geometric means, 95% confidence intervals) versus 1.37 (1.20-1.55) mug/ml, p<0.001). BALF levels of SerpinB1 were higher for infected versus non-infected CF subjects (5.5 versus 2.7 mug/ml, p<0.04) and substantially higher for elastase-positive versus elastase-negative CF subjects (8.41 versus 1.89 mug/ml, p<0.001). Most SerpinB1 in CF BALF had been cleaved. Adding recombinant SerpinB1 to CF BALF stoichiometrically inhibited endogenous elastase, indicating that the inhibitor functions in the CF microenvironment. In vitro simulations comparing SerpinB1 and alpha1antitrypsin (SerpinA1) showed that both rapidly form irreversible inhibitory covalent complexes with elastase and that these differed in survival time. The SerpinB1-elastase complex survived only briefly due to fragmentation of bound elastase, releasing cleaved SerpinB1, the molecular form in CF BALF. The findings define an innate role for SerpinB1 in CF airways.
  BACKGROUND: C-C chemokine receptor (CCR)7 is a regulator of dendritic cell and T cell migration, and its role in tissue wound healing has been investigated in various disease models. We have previously demonstrated that CCR7 and its ligand, chemokine (C-C motif) ligand (CCL)21, modulates wound repair in pulmonary fibrosis (PF) but the mechanism of this is unknown. The objective of this study was to investigate whether the absence of CCR7 protects against bleomycin (BLM)-induced PF. CCR7-/- mice failed to mount a fibrotic pulmonary response as assessed by histologic collagen staining and quantification by hydroxyproline. We hypothesized that the prominent characteristics of CCR7-/- mice, including elevated levels of cytokine and chemokine mediators and the presence of bronchus-associated lymphoid tissue (BALT) might be relevant to the protective phenotype. RESULTS: Pulmonary fibrosis was induced in CCR7+/+ and CCR7-/- mice via a single intratracheal injection of BLM. We found that the lung cytokine/chemokine milieu associated with the absence of CCR7 correlated with an increase in BALT, and might be attributable to regulatory T cell (Treg) homeostasis and trafficking within the lungs and lymph nodes. In response to BLM challenge, CCR7-/- mice exhibited an early, steady increase in lung CD4+ T cells and increased CD4+ CD25+ FoxP3+ Tregs in the lungs 21 days after challenge. These findings are consistent with increased lung expression of interleukin-2 and indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase in CCR7-/- mice, which promote Treg expansion. CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates that the protective phenotype associated with BLM-treated CCR7-/- mice correlates with the presence of BALT and the anchoring of Tregs in the lungs of CCR7-/- mice. These data provide novel evidence to support the further investigation of CCR7-mediated Treg trafficking in the modulation of BLM-induced PF.
  Bleomycins (BLMs) are widely used in combination with chemotherapy for the treatment of a variety of cancers. The clinical application of BLMs is featured by the occurrence of sometimes fatal side effects, such as renal and lung toxicity, and the potential dose-limiting side effect of pulmonary fibrosis. Therefore, it is highly desirable to develop a sensitive method to quantitatively determine the BLM content in both pharmaceutical analysis and clinical samples, to make full use of therapeutic efficacy and to weaken its toxicity. Here, we proposed a simple, rapid, and convenient electrochemical assay for trace BLM detection. A reported DNA motif, as substrate for BLMs, is prepared to self-assemble onto the gold electrode to fabricate an electrochemical DNA (E-DNA) sensor, with a terminus tethered on the electrode surface and the other terminus labeled with ferrocenyl moiety as a signal reporter to form a stem-loop structure, giving an arise of remarkable faradaic current. In the presence of Fe(II)·BLM, the E-DNA sensor undergoes the irreversible cleavage event, which can be transduced into a significant decrease in current peak. This proposed sensor reveals an impressive sensitivity as low as 100 pM BLMs and exhibits a good performance as well as in serum sample. Considering the high sensitivity and specificity of this proposed sensor, as well as the cost-effective and simple-to-implement features of the electrochemical technique, we believe that this method shows distinct advantages over conventional methods and it is a promising alternative for the determination of trace amounts of BLMs in clinical samples.
  The number of implanted the cardiovascular implantable electronic device(s) (CIED(s))--pacemakers (PM) and implantable cardioverters defibrillators (ICD)--increases each year. The number of CIED(s) exchange procedures as well as changes in models of stimulation (upgrade to dual chamber pacemakers or three chamber cardiac resynchronization therapy devices) also grows. Also increases the inactive electrode left in the cardiovascular system. The risk of infection is higher during the exchange of devices than with their implantation. Treatments for patients with multiple electrode systems are becoming a potential source of infection. The incidence of damage defibrillator is greater than pacemaker leads. Intracardiac electrodes causes the growth of connective tissue, fibrosis in the venous system and may cause obstruction subclavian vein or brachiocephalic preventing implantation needed a new electrode. Damaged and broken electrodes may migrate to the cavities of the heart. This increases the risk of thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, tricuspid valve dysfunction and serious arrhythmias. All these facts presented lead to the conclusion that the growing need to remove the electrodes (both infected and inactive) pacemaker or cardioverter defibrillator. There are two classes of indications to remove the electrodes. Procedures for removing the benefits must outweigh the risks. Should be considered for each patient individually and take into account the experience of the operator and its results. Class I indications are: lead dependent endocarditis, sepsis, arrhythmias or embolism secondary to the presence of lead, venous occlusion prevents the implantation of new electrodes, interference between the electrodes, an implantable device infection box. Class II includes: chronic pain in the area and inactive pacemaker electrodes in young people. After removal must be individually examined whether there is a need to implant the new layout. It should not be implanted in a place that has previously been infected. The preferred area is the opposite, iliac vein, reaching epicardial implantation.
  Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a chronic autoimmune disorder characterized by progressive fibrosis of the skin and visceral tissues as well as a noninflammatory vasculopathy. Vascular disease in systemic sclerosis is a major cause of morbidity and mortality among nonpregnant patients with SSc and is even a bigger concern in the pregnant SSc patient, as the underlying vasculopathy may prevent the required hemodynamic changes necessary to support a growing pregnancy. Vascular manifestations including scleroderma renal crisis and pulmonary arterial hypertension should be considered relative contraindications against pregnancy due to the high associations of both maternal and fetal morbidity and mortality. In contrast, Raynaud's phenomenon may actually improve somewhat during pregnancy. Women with SSc who are considering a pregnancy or discover they are pregnant require evaluation for the presence and extent of underlying vasculopathy. In the absence of significant visceral vasculopathy, most women with SSc can expect to have reasonable pregnancy outcomes.
  PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The aim is to provide a detailed review of recent publications on cystic fibrosis-related diabetes (CFRD) with a particular focus on the interplay between cystic fibrosis (CF) lung disease and diabetes. RECENT FINDINGS: CFRD is a form of diabetes that is distinct from type 1 or type 2 diabetes. CFRD remains very common and increases in prevalence with increasing age so that one in two middle-aged CF persons have CFRD. People with CFRD have lower lung function, worse nutrition, more frequent hospitalization, and worse mortality than CF people without diabetes. The excess mortality previously noted in women with CFRD compared with CF women without diabetes or CF men is much less apparent. CFRD is due to insulin deficiency and peripheral insulin resistance is much less a factor. Genetic susceptibility and oxidant stress are key risk factors for developing CFRD. The lung is the prime end organ target in CFRD and mortality is due to respiratory failure, not vascular complications. Insulin is the mainstay of therapy and early recognition and institution of therapy appear to improve health outcomes. SUMMARY: CFRD remains one of the most important co-morbidities in CF. Early recognition of the disease and therapeutic intervention may diminish the negative impact that diabetes has on lung health in CF. Although a clearer understanding of the role of oxidant stress and genetics in the pathogenesis of CFRD is being elucidated, much needs to be learned before more targeted, specific therapies can be developed for this distinct form of diabetes.
  Autoimmune pancreatitis (AIP) is recognized as a distinct clinical entity, identified as a chronic inflammatory process of the pancreas in which the autoimmune mechanism is involved. Clinically and histologically, AIP has two subsets: type 1--lymphoplasmatic sclerosing pancreatitis with abundant infiltration of the pancreas and other affected organs with immunoglobulin G4-positive plasma cells, and type 2--duct centric fibrosis, characterized by granulocyte epithelial lesions in the pancreas without systemic involvement. In the diagnosis of AIP, two diagnostic criterions are used--the HISORt criteria and Asian Diagnostic Criteria. In the differential diagnosis, the pancreatic cancer must be excluded by endosonographically guided pancreatic biopsy. Typical signs of AIP are concomitant disorders in other organs (kidney, liver, biliary tract, salivary glands, colon, retroperitoneum, prostate). Novel clinicopathological entity was proposed as an 'IgG4-related sclerosing disease' (IgG4-RSC). Extensive IgG4-positive plasma cells and T lymphocyte infiltration is a common characteristics of this disease. Recently, IgG4-RSC syndrome was extended to a new entity, characterized by IgG4 hypergammaglobulinemia and IgG4-positive plasma cell infiltration, this being considered an expression of a lymphoproliferative disease, 'IgG4-positive multiorgan lymphoproliferative syndrome'. This syndrome includes Mikulicz's disease, mediastinal fibrosis, autoimmune hypophysitis, and inflammatory pseudotumor--lung, liver, breast. In the therapy of AIP, steroids constitute first-choice treatment. High response to the corticosteroid therapy is an important diagnostic criterion. In the literature, there are no case-control studies that determine if AIP predisposes to pancreatic cancer. Undoubtedly, AIP is currently a hot topic in pancreatology.
  INTRODUCTION: The objective of the present study was to examine the association of baseline demographic and clinical characteristics with sequentially obtained measurements of forced vital capacity (FVC), expressed as a percentage of the predicted value, and to identify predictors of the decline rate in FVC over time in the Genetics versus Environment in Scleroderma Outcome Study (GENISOS). METHODS: To date, 266 patients have been enrolled in GENISOS, a prospective, observational cohort of patients with early systemic sclerosis. In addition to pulmonary function tests (PFTs), clinical and laboratory data were obtained from each patient. We analyzed 926 FVC measurements utilizing generalized linear mixed models. The predictive significance of baseline variables for the decline rate in FVC was investigated by the interaction term between the variable and the follow-up time within the first 3 years after enrollment as well as throughout the entire follow-up time. RESULTS: The cohort consisted of 125 white, 54 African American, and 77 Hispanic patients with average disease duration of 2.5 years at enrollment. The mean follow-up time was 3.8 years, ranging up to 11.4 years. A number of baseline variables, including antibody status, African American ethnicity, disease type, baseline PFT values, modified Rodnan Skin Score, fibrosis on chest radiograph, and lung and skin subscores of the Severity Index, were associated with serially measured FVC levels. However, only the presence of anti-topoisomerase I antibodies (ATA) was associated with lower FVC levels (P < 0.001) as well as accelerated decline rate in FVC within the first 3 years of follow-up (P = 0.02). None of the baseline variables predicted the rate of decline in FVC on long-term follow-up. Patients with rapidly progressive ILD, however, were under-represented in the long-term follow-up group because the accelerated rate of decline in FVC was associated with poor survival (P = 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Presence of ATA was the only baseline variable associated with differential FVC levels, predicting the rate of decline in FVC within the first 3 years of follow-up. The association of faster decline in FVC with poor survival further emphasizes the need for identification of predictive biomarkers by collection of genetic information and serial blood samples in cohort studies.
  Importance of the field: Cystic fibrosis (CF), one of the major respiratory diseases, is caused by mutations in a gene encoding for a chloride channel. Abnormal transepithelial ion transport leads to a reduced volume of the airway surface liquid layer and reduced mucociliary clearance. Areas covered in this review: There is currently no cure for CF and CF lung disease remains a major contributor to morbidity and mortality. However, most current treatments for CF lung disease do not address the underlying pathology. We describe here new therapeutic developments aiming to identify or generate compounds that counteract the effects of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) on the airway. What the reader will gain: This review summarizes the current state of new developments in the treatment of CF lung disease. These drugs include nebulized and inhaled osmotically active agents, but also modifiers of ion channels other than CFTR, such as activators of alternative chloride channels or inhibitors of sodium absorption, and compounds in development aim to correct or improve impaired CFTR function directly. First clinical trials with new drugs including ion channel modifiers and CFTR pharmacotherapeutics have revealed very promising results. Take home message: CF drug therapy is moving rapidly from symptomatic therapy to treatment of the underlying pathophysiology.
  Purpose. We sought to examine the employment experiences in a population of adolescents and young adults with cystic fibrosis (CF). Methods. We administered a cross-sectional survey to 68 individuals with CF, ages 16-25 years, assessing current employment experiences and perceptions of the impact of CF on these experiences. Results. Forty-six percent of respondents reported working < 20 h per week. Sixty-seven percent reported disclosing their diagnosis to their employer. Only one respondent reported receiving formal job guidance in CF clinic, and only 16% reported that a clinician had discussed job-related issues with them. Only 21% reported that they completed CF therapies at work. Older respondents (ages 22-25 years) and those with a lower lung function were more likely to agree that 'balancing employment and CF care is stressful.' Conclusions. The majority of adolescents and young adults with CF report disclosing their diagnosis at work. Most do not feel that working interferes with routine CF therapies. Very few have received any formal career guidance. Age and lung disease severity are associated with increased concerns about balancing CF care and employment.
  Trans-plasma membrane electron transport (t-PMET) has been established since the 1960s, but it has only been subject to more intensive research in the last decade. The discovery and characterization at the molecular level of its novel components has increased our understanding of how t-PMET regulates distinct cellular functions. This review will give an update on t-PMET, with particular emphasis on how its malfunction relates to some diseases, such as cancer, abnormal cell death, cardiovascular diseases, aging, obesity, neurodegenerative diseases, pulmonary fibrosis, asthma and genetically linked pathologies. Understanding these relationships may provide novel therapeutic approaches for pathologies associated with unbalanced redox state.
  Increased work of breathing is considered to be a limiting factor in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) performing aerobic exercise. We hypothesized that adolescents with CF and with static hyperinflation are more prone to a ventilatorily limited exercise capacity than non-static hyperinflated adolescents with CF.Exercise data of 119 adolescents with CF [range 12-18 years], stratified for static hyperinflation, defined as ratio of residual volume to total lung capacity (RV/TLC) > 30%, were obtained during a progressive bicycle ergometer test with gas analysis and analyzed for ventilatory limitation.Static hyperinflation showed a significant, though weak association (Phi 0.38; P < 0.001) with a ventilatorily limited exercise capacity (breathing reserve index at maximal effort >0.70; FEV(1) < 80% predicted and reduced exercise capacity, defined as VO(2peak) < 85% predicted). Analysis of association for increasing degrees of hyperinflation showed an increase to Phi 0.49 (P < 0.001) for RV/TLC > 50%. In adolescents with static hyperinflation, peak work rate (W(peak); 3.1 +/- 0.7 W/kg (75.1 +/- 17.3% of predicted), peak oxygen uptake (VO(2peak)/kg (ml/min/kg); 39.2 +/- 9.2 ml/min/kg (91.0 +/- 20.3% of predicted), peak heart rate (HR(peak); 176 +/- 19 beats/min) were significantly (P < 0.05) decreased when compared with non-static hyperinflated adolescents (W(peak) 3.5 +/- 0.5 W/kg (81.4 +/- 10.0% of predicted)); VO(2peak)/kg (ml/min/kg); 43.1 +/- 7.5 ml/min/kg (98.0 +/- 15.1% of predicted); and HR(peak) 185 +/- 14 beats/min). Additionally, no difference was found in the degree of association of FEV(1) (%) and RV/TLC (%) with VO(2peak)/kg(pred) and W(peak)/kg(Pred), but we found the RV/TLC (%) to be a slightly stronger predictor of VO(2peak)/kg(pred) and W(peak)/kg(Pred) than FEV(1) (%).These results indicate that the presence of static hyperinflation in adolescents with CF by itself does not strongly influence ventilatory constraints during exercise and that static hyperinflation is only a slightly stronger predictor of W(peak)/kg(Pred) and VO(2peak)/kg(Pred) than airflow obstruction (FEV(1) (%)). Pediatr. Pulmonol. (c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
  Inadequate intake and suboptimal growth are common problems for patients with CF and a critical target for intervention. The purpose of this study was to compare the growth outcomes of children with CF who participated in a randomized clinical trial to improve energy intake and weight to children with CF receiving standard of care during the same time period. Our primary outcome was change in body mass index z-score (BMI z-score) over 2 years. An exploratory outcome was forced expiratory volume at 1-sec (FEV(1)) over 2 years. Participants were children ages 4-12 with CF, who participated in a randomized clinical trial of behavior plus nutrition intervention versus nutrition education alone, and a matched Comparison Sample receiving standard of care drawn from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (CFF) Registry. Children in the Clinical Trial Group (N = 67) participated in a 9-week, nutrition intervention and were followed at regular intervals (3, 6, 12, 18, and 24 months) for 2 years post-treatment to obtain anthropometric and pulmonary function data. For each child in the Comparison Sample (N = 346), these measures were obtained from the CFF Registry at matching intervals for the 27-month period corresponding to the clinical trial. Over 27 months, children in the Clinical Trial Group (the combined sample of the behavior plus nutrition and the nutrition alone) demonstrated significantly less decline in BMI z-score, -0.05 (SD = 0.68, CI = -0.23 to 0.13), as compared to children in the Comparison Sample, -0.21 (SD = 0.67, CI = -0.31 to -0.11). No statistically significant differences were found for decline in FEV(1) between children in the Clinical Trial Group and the Comparison Sample. The key implication of these findings is that intensive behavioral and nutritional intervention is effective and needs to be adapted so that it can be broadly disseminated into clinical practice. Pediatr. Pulmonol. (c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
  BACKGROUND: Pauci-immune vasculitis is a heterogeneous disorder with an unfavourable prognosis. Renal involvement is frequently observed in antineutrophil cytoplasm autoantibody (ANCA)-associated small-vessel vasculitis and is an important cause of end-stage renal disease (ESRD). Renal replacement therapy (RRT) is frequently required. Although better prognosis under dialysis is well known, the long-term follow-up of pauci-immune renal vasculitis with RRT is rarely reported. METHODS: We described 24 patients with pauci-immune vasculitis and requirement of dialysis who were admitted in our institutions from January 1989 to December 2008. Mean age was 65 +/- 12 years at the beginning of dialysis. There were 12 males and 12 females. Patients with Wegener's granulomatosis, Churg-Strauss syndrome or evidence of anti-glomerular basement membrane were excluded. The study group was formed by patients with a diagnosis of necrotizing extracapillary glomerulonephritis and microscopic polyangiitis. RESULTS: The distribution according to ANCAs was 14 p-ANCA (58%), 5 c-ANCA (21%) and 5 ANCA-negative (21%) pauci-immune renal vasculitis. Pulmonary renal syndrome (PRS) was observed in 10 patients at the onset of vasculitis. Corticosteroids and daily cyclophosphamide were administered to 18 patients, and one patient had intravenous cyclophosphamide. Five patients received isolated corticosteroid therapy. Early reduction in cyclophosphamide dosage was required in five patients due to leucopaenia. Mean follow-up after first dialysis was 89 +/- 66 months (range 2-208). Twenty patients were included in haemodialysis (HD), and four patients were included in peritoneal dialysis (PD). At the end of the study, nine patients had received a cadaveric kidney transplant (KT). Relapses rate after the onset of dialysis was 0.03 episode/patient/year. PRS-associated relapses after beginning dialysis were observed in four patients. Main therapy in relapses was also corticosteroids and cyclophosphamide. Survival rates for year 1, 2 and 5 was 91%, 91% and 85%, respectively. Overall mortality at the end of the study was 31.8%. Five patients died in the PRS group, but only one death was associated with progressive pulmonary fibrosis. Higher mortality was observed in PRS vasculitis present at the onset of RRT (50% vs 16.7%, P = NS). Better outcome in patients who received a renal transplantation was observed (88.8% vs 53.8%, P = NS). Conclusions. Despite a low number of patients in this series, pauci-immune vasculitis prognosis under dialysis seems equal to other causes of chronic kidney disease. This study observed a low rate of relapses after beginning dialysis. Poor prognosis is related to severe complications at the beginning of RRT. Today, kidney transplantation is an important therapeutic option for these patients.
  BACKGROUND: Pre-operative infection with organisms from the Burkholderia cepacia complex (BCC), particularly B cenocepacia, has been linked with a poorer prognosis after transplantation compared to patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) without this infection. Therefore, many transplant centers do not list these patients for transplantation. METHODS: We report the early and long-term results of a cohort of lung transplant recipients with CF and pre-operative BCC infection. Patients with pre-transplantation BCC infection were identified by case-note review. BCC species status was assigned by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based techniques. Survival rates were compared to recipients with CF without BCC infection. Survival rates in BCC subgroups were also compared, and then further analyzed pre- and post-2001, when a new immunosuppressive and antibiotic regime was introduced for such patients. RESULTS: Two hundred sixteen patients with CF underwent lung transplantation and 22 had confirmed pre-operative BCC infection, with 12 of these being B cenocepacia. Nine B cenocepacia-infected recipients died within the first year, and in 8 BCC sepsis was considered to be the cause of death. Despite instituting a tailored peri-operative immunosuppressive and microbiologic care approach for such patients, post-transplantation BCC septic deaths occurred frequently in those with pre-transplantation B cenocepacia infection. In contrast, recipients infected with other BCC species had significantly better outcomes, with post-transplantation survival comparable to other recipients with CF. CONCLUSIONS: Mortality in patients with B cenocepacia infection was unacceptably high and has led to our center no longer accepting patients with this condition onto the lung transplant waiting list. Long-term survival in the non-B cenocepacia BCC group was excellent, without high rates of acute rejection or bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome (BOS) longer term, and these patients continue to be considered for lung transplantation.
  BACKGROUND: Pirfenidone (PFD) is a molecule that exhibits antifibrotic properties in a variety of in vitro and animal models of lung, liver and renal fibrosis. These pathologies share many fibrogenic pathways with an abnormal fibrous wound-healing process; consequently, tissue repair and tissue regeneration-regulating mechanisms are altered. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the usefulness of PFD as an antifibrotic agent in clinical and experimental models of fibrotic disease. CONCLUSIONS: There is a growing understanding of the molecular effects of PFD on the wound healing mechanism, leading to novel approaches for the management of fibrosis in lung, liver and renal tissues. Although the optimum treatment for fibrosis remains undefined, it is possible that combined therapeutic regimens that include this wide-application molecule, pirfenidone, could offer a useful treatment for fibrotic disease.
  MRI for AF Patient Selection and Ablation Approach. Introduction: Left atrial (LA) fibrosis and ablation related scarring are major predictors of success in rhythm control of atrial fibrillation (AF). We used delayed enhancement MRI (DE-MRI) to stratify AF patients based on pre-ablation fibrosis and also to evaluate ablation-induced scarring in order to identify predictors of a successful ablation. Methods and Results: One hundred and forty-four patients were staged by percent of fibrosis quantified with DE-MRI, relative to the LA wall volume: minimal or Utah stage 1; <5%, mild or Utah stage 2; 5-20%, moderate or Utah stage 3; 20-35%, and extensive or Utah stage 4; >35%. All patients underwent pulmonary vein (PV) isolation and posterior wall and septal debulking. Overall, LA scarring was quantified and PV antra were evaluated for circumferential scarring 3 months post ablation. LA scarring post ablation was comparable across the 4 stages. Most patients had either no (36.8%) or 1 PV (32.6%) antrum circumferentially scarred. Forty-two patients (29%) had recurrent AF over 283 +/- 167 days. No recurrences were noted in Utah stage 1. Recurrence was 28% in Utah stage 2, 35% in Utah stage 3, and 56% in Utah stage 4. Recurrence was predicted by circumferential PV scarring in Utah stage 2 and by overall LA wall scarring in Utah stage 3. No recurrence predictors were identified in Utah stage 4. Conclusions: Circumferential PV antral scarring predicts ablation success in mild LA fibrosis, while posterior wall and septal scarring is needed for moderate fibrosis. This may help select the proper candidate and strategy in catheter ablation of AF. (J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol, Vol. pp. 1-7).
  BACKGROUND: Pulmonary fibrosis (PF), cystic fibrosis (CF) and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) often cause chronic respiratory failure (CRF). METHODS: In order to investigate if there are different patterns of adaptation of the ventilatory pump in CRF, in three groups of lung transplant candidates with PF (n=9, forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1))=37+/-3% predicted, forced vital capacity (FVC)=32+/-2% predicted), CF (n=9, FEV(1)=22+/-3% predicted, FVC=30+/-3% predicted) and COPD (n=21, FEV(1)=21+/-1% predicted, FVC=46+/-2% predicted), 10 healthy controls and 16 transplanted patients, total and compartmental chest wall volumes were measured by opto-electronic plethysmography during rest and exercise. RESULTS: Three different breathing patterns were found during CRF in PF, CF and COPD. Patients with COPD were characterised by a reduced duty cycle at rest and maximal exercise (34+/-1%, p<0.001), while patients with PF and CF showed an increased breathing frequency (49+/-6 and 34+/-2/min, respectively) and decreased tidal volume (0.75+/-0.10 and 0.79+/-0.07 litres) (p<0.05). During exercise, end-expiratory chest wall and rib cage volumes increased significantly in patients with COPD and CF but not in those with PF. End-inspiratory volumes did not increase in CF and PF. The breathing pattern of transplanted patients was similar to that of healthy controls. CONCLUSIONS: There are three distinct patterns of CRF in patients with PF, CF and COPD adopted by the ventilatory pump to cope with the underlying lung disease that may explain why patients with PF and CF are prone to respiratory failure earlier than patients with COPD. After lung transplantation the chronic adaptations of the ventilatory pattern to advanced lung diseases are reversible and indicate that the main contributing factor is the lung itself rather than systemic effects of the disease.
  BACKGROUND: Osteopontin (OPN) is a glycoprotein that has been associated with inflammation and fibrosis. Severe refractory asthma (SRA) is characterised by an intense inflammatory and remodelling process. The aim of this study was to investigate the levels of OPN in sputum supernatants of patients with SRA, to compare them with milder forms of the disease and to investigate their possible association with mediators and cells involved in the inflammatory and remodelling process. METHODS: 33 patients with SRA, 29 with moderate asthma, 21 with steroid-naïve asthma and 20 healthy subjects were studied. All subjects underwent lung function tests, bronchial hyper-responsiveness assessment and sputum induction for cell count identification and measurement of OPN, vascular endothelial growth factor, transforming growth factor beta1 (TGF-beta1), cysteinyl leukotrienes, interleukin 13 (IL-13), eosinophilic cationic protein (ECP) and IL-8 in sputum supernatants. RESULTS: Median (IQR) OPN levels (pg/ml) were significantly higher in patients with SRA than in those with moderate asthma, steroid-naive asthma and healthy control subjects (1840 (1125-11000) vs 130 (100-210) vs 100 (67-130) vs 50 (42-70), respectively, p<0.001). Regression analysis showed a significant association between log OPN and sputum eosinophils, cysteinyl leukotrienes, IL-13, TGF-beta1 and ECP. TGF-beta1 represented the strongest association with OPN. The above associations were not observed in milder forms of the disease or in healthy subjects. CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that OPN levels are higher in SRA than in less severe forms of the disease. Moreover, OPN is associated with mediators involved in both the inflammatory and remodelling process such as TGF-beta1, IL-13 and cysteinyl leukotrienes only in SRA.
  BACKGROUND: Pathological angiogenesis contributes to various ocular, malignant, and inflammatory disorders, emphasizing the need to understand this process more precisely on a molecular level. Previously we found that CIB1, a 22 kDa regulatory protein, plays a critical role in endothelial cell function, angiogenic growth factor-mediated cellular functions, PAK1 activation, MMP-2 expression, and in vivo ischemia-induced angiogenesis. Since pathological angiogenesis is highly dependent on many of these same processes, we hypothesized that CIB1 may also regulate tumor-induced angiogenesis. METHODS: To test this hypothesis, we allografted either murine B16 melanoma or Lewis lung carcinoma cells into WT and CIB1-KO mice, and monitored tumor growth, morphology, histology, and intra-tumoral microvessel density. RESULTS: Allografted melanoma tumors that developed in CIB1-KO mice were smaller in volume, had a distinct necrotic appearance, and had significantly less intra-tumoral microvessel density. Similarly, allografted Lewis lung carcinoma tumors in CIB1-KO mice were smaller in volume and mass, and appeared to have decreased perfusion. Intra-tumoral hemorrhage, necrosis, and perivascular fibrosis were also increased in tumors that developed in CIB1-KO mice. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that, in addition to its other functions, CIB1 plays a critical role in facilitating tumor growth and tumor-induced angiogenesis.
  The study was concerned with identifying toxic effect of certain methods of radiotherapy of metastatic lesions of the lung. Leukocyte index intoxication (Kalf-Kalif), paramecin test and mean molecule level determination were used. The worst endogenous intoxication was found to be caused by irradiating four consecutive fields of the mediastinum. The least damage was caused in combination with artificial pneumothorax. Use of smaller-size fields of irradiation was followed by a significant drop in adverse side-effects.
  An analysis of results and treatment outcomes of 178 patients has been made. The patients were examined 1, 3, 6, 12, 24 months after discharge from hospital. The parameters characterizing residual cavities, pneumofibrosis, pleural fibrosis and changes in the bronchial tree were analyzed. Recovery was noted in 172 patients (96.63%). According to CT scan data positive dynamics in the reparative processes in the lungs and pleural cavity could be seen. No relapses of the purulent processes and development of lung cirrhosis were noted.
  An eroded atheromatous aorta may be a source of cholesterol crystal embolism(CCE). Embolization of atheromatous material accounts for obstruction of distal arterioles around which a foreign-body giant cell granuloma inflammatory reaction develops. The diagnosis is often delayed or un recognized because of varying or misleading clinical signs, such as renal insufficiency, digestive or neurological symptoms, or both or unexplained multiple-system disease. Although CCE can occur spontaneously, it has been increasingly recognized as an iatrogenic complication from an invasive vascular procedure, such as manipulation of the aorta during angiography or vascular surgery. It has also been reported to occur following anticoagulant therapy or thrombolysis. Patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) often experience a combination of these factors: anticoagulation, intra-arterial angiographic procedures and intraoperative aortic cross-clamping. These multiple factors could account for the acute and severe postoperative clinical and biological findings observed in the case reported here. A 65-year-old Saudi man was admitted to our hospital on July 9, 2008 due to chest pain at rest. He had suffered from type 2 diabetes mellitus on Oral hypoglycemics, hypertension on treatment, impaired renal functions and hypercholesterolemia, he was an ex-smoker with history of diagnosed pulmonary interstitial fibrosis. He had Coronary angiography in another hospital on May 2008 showing a left main lesion 60%, Left anterior descending lesion 90%, circumflex lesion 80% and Right coronary lesion 70%, three weeks later an acute on top of chronic deterioration in renal chemistry was observed for which conservative treatment was chosen.
  INTRODUCTION: Bacterial colonization of the lungs is the main cause of morbidity in cystic fibrosis (CF). Pathogens such as Staphylococcus aureus are very well adapted to the pulmonary environment and may persist for years in the same patient. Genetic determinants of these bacteria, such as the presence of SCCmec have recently emerged as a problem in this population of patients. METHODS: Staphylococcus aureus isolates obtained from different clinical materials coming from CF and non-CF patients attended at a cystic fibrosis reference hospital were compared according to SCCmec type and antibiotic susceptibility profile. RESULTS: Three hundred and sixty-four single-patient Staphylococcus aureus isolates were collected, of which 164 (45%) were from CF patients. Among the latter, 57/164 (44.5%) were MRSA, and among the non-CF patients, 89/200 (35%) were MRSA. Associated pathogens were found in 38 CF patients. All 57 MRSA from CF patients harbored the multiresistant cassette type III. In contrast, 31/89 MRSA from non-CF patients harbored SCCmec type I (35%) and 44/89 harbored type III (49%). The antibiotic susceptibility pattern was similar between CF and non-CF patients. CONCLUSIONS: The high prevalence of multiresistant SCCmec type III among CF patients compared with non-CF patients in our institution may make it difficult to control disease progression through antibiotic therapy for promoting the survival of this kind of patient.
  Our previous studies proved that myofibrillogenesis regulator-1 (MR-1) has a close relationship with cardiac hypertrophy induced by angiotensin (Ang) II. Here in the present study, we developed a recombinant adenoviral vector (AdSiR-MR-1) driving small interfering (si)RNA against MR-1 to evaluate its effect on cardiac hypertrophy in vivo. Cardiac hypertrophy was induced by chronic Ang II infusion in the mice; AdSiR-MR-1 was administered via the jugular vein through one bolus injection. Thirteen days after injection, the viral DNA was still detectable in the heart, validating the efficiency of gene transfer. The expression levels of MR-1 mRNA and protein were increased by 2.5-fold in the heart after Ang II infusion; AdSiR-control, which contains a scrambled siRNA sequence, had no effect on them. AdSiR-MR-1 treatment abolished the up-regulation of MR-1 induced by Ang II. The silencing effect of AdSiR-MR-1 was observed in many other tissues such as the liver, lung, and kidney, except skeletal muscle. Ang II-induced cardiac hypertrophy was suppressed in mice treated with AdSiR-MR-1, as determined by echocardiography. Morphological and immnohistochemical examinations revealed that interstitial cardiac fibrosis as well as infiltrating inflammatory cells was increased after Ang II infusion, AdSiR-MR-1 ameliorates these disorders greatly. In Ang II-infused mice, MR-1 silencing also blocked the up-regulation of other genes related to cardiac hypertrophy or metabolism of the extracellular matrix. In summary, our results demonstrate the feasibility of MR-1 silencing in vivo and suggest that MR-1 could be a potential new target to treat cardiac hypertrophy induced by Ang II.
  A balance sheet describing the integrated homeostasis of secretion, absorption, and surface movement of liquids on pulmonary surfaces has remained elusive. It remains unclear whether the alveolus exhibits an intra-alveolar ion/liquid transport physiology or whether it secretes ions/liquid that may communicate with airway surfaces. Studies employing isolated human AT2 cells were utilized to investigate this question. Human AT2 cells exhibited both epithelial Na+ channel (ENaC)-mediated Na+ absorption and cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR)-mediated Cl- secretion, both significantly regulated by extracellular nucleotides. In addition, we observed in normal AT2 cells an absence of CFTR regulation of ENaC activity and an absence of expression/activity of reported calcium-activated chloride channels (TMEM16A, Bestrophin-1, ClC2, and SLC26A9), both features strikingly different from normal airway epithelial cells. Measurements of alveolar surface liquid (AvSL) volume revealed that normal AT2 cells: 1) achieved an extracellular nucleotide concentration-dependent steady-state alveolar surface liquid (AvSL) height of approximately 4 um in vitro; 2) absorbed liquid when the lumen was flooded; and 3) secreted liquid when treated with uridine 5 triphosphate (UTP), forskolin, or subjected to cyclic compressive stresses mimicking tidal breathing. Collectively, our studies suggest that human AT2 cells in vitro have the capacity to absorb or secrete liquid in response to local alveolar conditions.
  Cell-based therapies with embryonic or adult stem cells, including induced pluripotent stem cells, have emerged as potential novel approaches for several devastating and otherwise incurable lung diseases, including emphysema, pulmonary fibrosis, pulmonary hypertension, and the acute respiratory distress syndrome. Although initial studies suggested engraftment of exogenously administered stem cells in lung, this is now generally felt to be a rare occurrence of uncertain physiologic significance. However, more recent studies have demonstrated paracrine effects of administered cells, including stimulation of angiogenesis and modulation of local inflammatory and immune responses in mouse lung disease models. Based on these studies and on safety and initial efficacy data from trials of adult stem cells in other diseases, groundbreaking clinical trials of cell-based therapy have been initiated for pulmonary hypertension and for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. In parallel, the identity and role of endogenous lung progenitor cells in development and in repair from injury and potential contribution as lung cancer stem cells continue to be elucidated. Most recently, novel bioengineering approaches have been applied to develop functional lung tissue ex vivo. Advances in each of these areas will be described in this review with particular reference to animal models.
  Evidence of immune stimulation has been noted in opiate dependent patients for many decades. Documented changes have included lymphadenopathy, round cell infiltration of the hepatic portal triads, diffuse peri-bronchitis, hyperglobulinaemia, lymphocytosis, monocytosis, systemic cytokine stimulation, and cytokine and chemokine activation within the neuraxis. A parallel literature describes an elevated list of chronic degenerative disease as common in such patients including neurodegenerative conditions, atherosclerosis, nephrosclerosis, hepatic fibrosis and cirrhosis, chronic obstructive and fibrotic lung disease, osteoporosis, chronic periodontitis, various cancers, hair greying, and stem cell suppression. All of these disorders are now known to have an important immunological role in their pathogenic pathways. The multisystem nature of these myriad changes strongly suggest that the ageing process itself is stimulated in these patients. The link between the immunostimulation on the one hand and the elevated and temporally advanced nature of the chronic degenerative diseases on the other appears not to have been made in the literature. Moreover as immunostimulation is also believed to be an important, potent and principal contributor to the ageing process it appears that experimental and studies of this putative link are warranted. Verification of such an hypothesis would also carry management implications for dose and duration of chronic pain and addiction treatment, pharmacotherapeutic selection, and novel treatments such as long term naltrexone implant therapy and heroin trials.
  BACKGROUND: Cystic fibrosis is a debilitating lung disease due to mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator protein (CFTR) and is associated with chronic infections resulting in elevated myeloperoxidase activity and generation of hypochlorous acid (HOCl). CFTR mutations lead to decreased levels of glutathione (GSH) and thiocyanate (SCN) in the epithelial lining fluid (ELF). Hypertonic saline is used to improve lung function however the mechanism is uncertain. METHODS: In the present study, the effect of GSH and SCN on HOCl-mediated cell injury and their changes in the ELF after hypertonic saline nebulization in wild type (WT) and CFTR KO mice was examined. CFTR sufficient and deficient lung cells were assessed for GSH, SCN and corresponding sensitivity towards HOCl-mediated injury, in vitro. RESULTS: CFTR (-) cells had lower extracellular levels of both GSH and SCN and were more sensitive to HOCl-mediated injury. In vivo, hypertonic saline increased ELF GSH in the WT and to a lesser extent in the CFTR KO mice but only SCN in the WT ELF. Finally, potential protective effects of GSH and SCN at concentrations found in the ELF against HOCl toxicity were examined in vitro. CONCLUSIONS: While the concentrations of GSH and SCN associated with the WT ELF protect against HOCl toxicity, those found in the CFTR KO mice were less sufficient to inhibit cell injury. These data suggests that CFTR has important roles in exporting GSH and SCN which are protective against oxidants and that hypertonic saline treatment may have beneficial effects by increasing their levels in the lung.
  Patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) experience a progressive deterioration in health leading to a shortened life expectancy with concomitant psychologic challenges that also may require intervention. Approaches to address psychologic dysfunction include insight-oriented therapy, cognitive-behavioral therapy, biofeedback, hypnosis, massage, music therapy, relaxation, and family therapy. Patients who learn to use coping strategies are more likely to adhere to treatment, which helps improve both their physical and psychologic well-being. Unique stressors arise for patients awaiting lung transplant as a result of their advanced state of disease along with their fear of death before donor lungs become available. This case report demonstrates some of the psychologic struggles faced by a 10-year-old with CF as he awaited lung transplantation, which led to a loss of hope and his request for withdrawal of care. Encouraging of the patient to express how his life might be improved yielded changes in his management that restored his hopefulness, and allowed him to survive long enough to undergo successful lung transplantation. Thus, reestablishment of hope might be studied as an additional intervention to help improve the well-being of patients who are seriously ill.
  OBJECTIVE: Children with Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) exhibit dramatically accelerated cardiovascular disease (CVD), causing death from myocardial infarction or stroke between the ages of 7 and 20 years. We undertook the first histological comparative evaluation between genetically confirmed HGPS and the CVD of aging. METHODS AND RESULTS: We present structural and immunohistological analysis of cardiovascular tissues from 2 children with HGPS who died of myocardial infarction. Both had features classically associated with the atherosclerosis of aging, as well as arteriolosclerosis of small vessels. In addition, vessels exhibited prominent adventitial fibrosis, a previously undescribed feature of HGPS. Importantly, although progerin was detected at higher rates in the HGPS coronary arteries, it was also present in non-HGPS individuals. Between the ages of 1 month and 97 years, progerin staining increased an average of 3.34% per year (P<0.0001) in coronary arteries. CONCLUSIONS: We find concordance among many aspects of cardiovascular pathology in both HGPS and geriatric patients. HGPS generates a more prominent adventitial fibrosis than typical CVD. Vascular progerin generation in young non-HGPS individuals, which significantly increases throughout life, strongly suggests that progerin has a role in the cardiovascular aging of the general population.
  AIMS: The role of nuclear factor (NF)-κB in heart failure (HF) is not well defined. We sought to determine whether myocyte-localized NF-κB p65 activation in HF exacerbates post-infarction remodelling and promotes maladaptive endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. METHODS AND RESULTS: Non-transgenic (NTg) and transgenic (Tg) mice with myocyte-restricted overexpression of a phosphorylation-resistant inhibitor of κBα (IκBα(S32A,S36A)) underwent coronary ligation (to induce HF) or sham operation. Over 4 weeks, the remote myocardium of ligated hearts exhibited robust NF-κB activation that was almost exclusively p65 beyond 24 h. Compared with sham at 4 weeks, NTg HF hearts were dilated and dysfunctional, and exhibited hypertrophy, fibrosis, up-regulation of inflammatory cytokines, increased apoptosis, down-regulation of ER protein chaperones, and up-regulation of the ER stress-activated pro-apoptotic factor CHOP. Compared with NTg HF, Tg-IκBα(S32A,S36A) HF mice exhibited: (i) improved survival, chamber remodelling, systolic function, and pulmonary congestion, (ii) markedly diminished NF-κB p65 activation, cytokine expression, and fibrosis, and (iii) a three-fold reduction in apoptosis. Moreover, Tg-IκBα(S32A,S36A) HF hearts exhibited maintained expression of ER chaperones and CHOP when compared with sham. In cardiomyocytes, NF-κB activation was required for ER stress-mediated apoptosis, whereas abrogation of myocyte NF-κB shifted the ER stress response to one of adaptation and survival. CONCLUSION: Persistent myocyte NF-κB p65 activation in HF exacerbates cardiac remodelling by imparting pro-inflammatory, pro-fibrotic, and pro-apoptotic effects. p65 modulation of cell death in HF may occur in part from NF-κB-mediated transformation of the ER stress response from one of adaptation to one of apoptosis.
  The objective of this study was to examine what kinds of cytokines are related to lung disorder by well-dispersed nanoparticles. The mass median diameter of nickel oxide in distilled water was 26 nm. Rats intratracheally received 0.2 mg of nickel oxide suspended in distilled water, and were sacrificed from three days to six months. The concentrations of 21 cytokines including inflammation, fibrosis and allergy-related ones were measured in the lung. Infiltration of alveolar macrophages was observed persistently in the nickel oxide-exposed group. Expression of macrophage inflammatory protein-1alpha showed a continued increase in lung tissue and broncho-alveolar lavage fluid (BALF) while interleukin-1alpha (IL-1alpha), IL-1beta in lung tissue and monocyte chemotactic protein-1 in BALF showed transient increases. Taken together, it was suggested that nano-agglomerates of nickel oxide nanoparticles have a persistent inflammatory effect, and the transient increase in cytokine expression and persistent increases in CC chemokine were involved in the persistent pulmonary inflammation.
  PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review summarizes recently published data on the epidemiology, pathophysiology and treatment of cystic fibrosis (CF)-related low bone mineral density (BMD). RECENT FINDINGS: A systematic literature review reports that the pooled prevalence of osteoporosis in adults with CF is 23.5% [95% confidence interval (CI) 16.6-31.0] and the pooled prevalences of radiologically confirmed vertebral and nonvertebral fractures are 14% (95% CI 7.8-21.7) and 19.7% (95% CI 6.0-38.8), respectively. Recent data suggest that the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) is expressed in bone cells and that CFTR dysfunction affects bone cell activity. The secondary effects of CFTR dysfunction also influence bone metabolism. For example, bone resorption increases during CF pulmonary exacerbations due to the stimulatory effects of proinflammatory cytokines on osteoclast activity. Bisphosphonates inhibit osteoclastic bone resorption and recent data show that both oral and intravenous bisphosphonates improve BMD in patients with CF. SUMMARY: CF-related low BMD is a common but treatable complication of CF.
  Cystic fibrosis (CF), which is caused by mutations in CFTR, affects many tissues, including the lung. Submucosal gland serous acinar cells are primary sites of fluid secretion and CFTR expression in the lung. Absence of CFTR in these cells may contribute to CF lung pathogenesis by disrupting fluid secretion. Here, we have isolated primary serous acinar cells from wild-type and CFTR-/- pigs and humans without CF to investigate the cellular mechanisms and regulation of fluid secretion by optical imaging. Porcine and human serous cells secrete fluid in response to vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) and other agents that raise intracellular cAMP levels; here, we have demonstrated that this requires CFTR and a cAMP-dependent rise in intracellular Ca2+ concentration ([Ca2+]i). Importantly, cAMP induced the release of Ca2+ from InsP3-sensitive Ca2+ stores also responsive to cAMP-independent agonists such as cholinergic, histaminergic, and purinergic agonists that stimulate CFTR-independent fluid secretion. This provides two types of synergism that strongly potentiated cAMP-mediated fluid secretion but differed in their CFTR dependencies. First, CFTR-dependent secretion was strongly potentiated by low VIP and carbachol concentrations that individually were unable to stimulate secretion. Second, higher VIP concentrations more strongly potentiated the [Ca2+]i responses, enabling ineffectual levels of cholinergic stimulation to strongly activate CFTR-independent fluid secretion. These results identify important molecular mechanisms of cAMP-dependent secretion, including a requirement for Ca2+ signaling, and suggest new therapeutic approaches to correct defective submucosal gland secretion in CF.
  Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a recessive disease that affects multiple organs. It is caused by mutations in CFTR. Animal modeling of this disease has been challenging, with species- and strain-specific differences in organ biology and CFTR function influencing the emergence of disease pathology. Here, we report the phenotype of a CFTR-knockout ferret model of CF. Neonatal CFTR-knockout ferrets demonstrated many of the characteristics of human CF disease, including defective airway chloride transport and submucosal gland fluid secretion; variably penetrant meconium ileus (MI); pancreatic, liver, and vas deferens disease; and a predisposition to lung infection in the early postnatal period. Severe malabsorption by the gastrointestinal (GI) tract was the primary cause of death in CFTR-knockout kits that escaped MI. Elevated liver function tests in CFTR-knockout kits were corrected by oral administration of ursodeoxycholic acid, and the addition of an oral proton-pump inhibitor improved weight gain and survival. To overcome the limitations imposed by the severe intestinal phenotype, we cloned 4 gut-corrected transgenic CFTR-knockout kits that expressed ferret CFTR specifically in the intestine. One clone passed feces normally and demonstrated no detectable ferret CFTR expression in the lung or liver. The animals described in this study are likely to be useful tools for dissecting CF disease pathogenesis and developing treatments.
  Cystic fibrosis (CF) is caused by defects in the CFTR, a cAMP-activated Cl- channel of epithelia. The resulting reduction in epithelial fluid transport creates abnormally viscous secretions from airway mucous glands that may be a major factor in CF pathology. Mouse airways have few mucous glands, and the mouse model of CF exhibits no significant airway disease. Pigs and ferrets, however, have approximately the same number of airway mucous glands as humans. In this issue of the JCI, three independent research groups conclude that changes in airway mucous gland function in CFTR-deficient animals of these species resemble the changes seen in human CF. It is expected, therefore, that these animals will develop lung disease similar to human CF and prove to be valuable models on which to test potential therapies.
  Fibrotic reactions in the airways of the lung or the pulmonary interstitium are a common pathologic outcome after exposure to a wide variety of toxic agents, including metals, particles or fibers. The survival of mesenchymal cells (fibroblasts and myofibroblasts) is a key factor in determining whether a fibroproliferative response that occurs after toxic injury to the lung will ultimately resolve or progress to a pathologic state. Several polypeptide growth factors, including members of the platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) family and the epidermal growth factor (EGF) family, are prosurvival factors that stimulate a replicative and migratory mesenchymal cell phenotype during the early stages of lung fibrogenesis. This replicative phenotype can progress to a matrix synthetic phenotype in the presence of transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1). The resolution of a fibrotic response requires growth arrest and apoptosis of mesenchymal cells, whereas progressive chronic fibrosis has been associated with mesenchymal cell resistance to apoptosis. Mesenchymal cell survival or apoptosis is further influenced by cytokines secreted during Th1 inflammation (e.g., IFN-γ) or Th2 inflammation (e.g., IL-13) that modulate the expression of growth factor activity through the STAT family of transcription factors. Understanding the mechanisms that regulate the survival or death of mesenchymal cells is central to ultimately developing therapeutic strategies for lung fibrosis.
  OBJECTIVES:Evidence suggests that cystic fibrosis liver disease (CFLD) does not affect mortality or morbidity in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). The importance of gender and age in outcome in CF makes selection of an appropriate comparison group central to the interpretation of any differences in mortality and morbidity in patients with CFLD.METHODS:This is a 7-year follow-up of 42 children with CFLD and their age- and sex-matched controls. Participants were reviewed clinically, biochemically, and radiologically at follow-up.RESULTS:Overall, 85% (72 of 84) of the original cohort were included, 36 CFLD participants and 36 CF controls. There was no significant difference in the number of deaths/transplants between groups (7 of 36 (19.4%) CFLD participants, 3 of 36 (8.3%) CF controls). There was a tendency for participants with CFLD to die younger than their respective CF controls. There was no difference in height, weight, body mass index, or pulmonary function between the groups. Nutritional parameters (sum skinfold thickness 31.6 vs. 42.3, P=0.03; mean upper arm fat area 15.08 vs. 10.59, P=0.001; Shwachman score 43.7 vs. 32.1, P=0.001) were worse among CFLD participants than among CF controls. Cystic fibrosis-related diabetes was more common in CFLD participants (11 of 27 (40.7%) vs. 5 of 33 (15.2%), P=0.02). Eight children (22.2%) with evidence of CFLD at baseline had no clinical evidence of liver disease as adults.CONCLUSIONS:Patients with CFLD have a more severe CF phenotype than do CF patients without liver disease. However, a subgroup of children with CFLD will not manifest clinically significant liver disease as adults.Am J Gastroenterol advance online publication, 24 August 2010; doi:10.1038/ajg.2010.316.
  Interstitial lung disease (ILD) is a challenging clinical entity associated with multiple connective tissue diseases, and is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality. Effective therapies for connective tissue disease-associated interstitial lung disease (CTD-ILD) are still lacking. Multidisciplinary clinics dedicated to the early diagnosis and improved management of patients with CTD-ILD are now being established. There is rapid progress in understanding and identifying the effector cells, the proinflammatory and profibrotic mediators, and the pathways involved in the pathogenesis of CTD-ILD. Serum biomarkers may provide new insights as risk factors for pulmonary fibrosis and as measures of disease progression. Despite these recent advances, the management of patients with CTD-ILD remains suboptimal. Further studies are therefore urgently needed to better understand these conditions, and to develop effective therapeutic interventions.
  Over the last two decades, enormous effort has focused on developing viral-based gene delivery vectors to target the respiratory airway epithelium as a potential treatment for cystic fibrosis (CF) lung disease. However, amongst other problems, the efficiency of gene delivery to the differentiated airway epithelial cells of the lung has been too low for clinical benefit. Although not a target for CF therapy, the nasal epithelium exhibits similar cellular morphology and composition of that of the lower airways, thus representing an accessible and relevant tissue target for evaluating novel and improved gene delivery vectors. We previously reported that replication-competent human parainfluenza virus-based (PIV) vectors efficiently deliver the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene to sufficient numbers of cultured CF airway epithelial cells to completely correct the bioelectric function of CF cells to normal levels resulting in restoration of mucus transport. Here, using an in vitro model of rhesus airway epithelium, we demonstrate that PIV mediates efficient gene transfer in rhesus epithelium as in the human counterpart. Naïve rhesus macaques were inoculated intranasally with a PIV vector expressing rhesus macaque -fetoprotein (rhAFP), and expression monitored longitudinally. RhAFP was detected in nasal lavage fluid and in serum samples, indicating that PIV-mediated gene transfer was effective and that rhAFP was secreted into both mucosal and serosal compartments. Although expression was transient, lasting up to 10 days, it paralleled virus replication suggesting that as PIV was cleared then rhAFP expression was lost. No adverse reactions or signs of discomfort were noted, and only mild, transient elevations of a small number of inflammatory cytokines were measured at the peak of virus replication. In sum, rhAFP proved suitable for monitoring in vivo gene delivery over time, and PIV vectors appear to be promising airway-specific gene transfer vehicles that warrant further development.
  The available evidence for long-term, low-dose treatment with 14- and 15-membered ring macrolides in non-cystic fibrosis (CF) bronchiectasis, COPD, chronic sinusitis, and asthma is reviewed with special attention to possible adverse effects and the emergence of resistance during long-term macrolide treatment. Macrolide maintenance therapy has been proven to be of benefit in diffuse panbronchiolitis and CF, presumably due to an anti-inflammatory mechanism of action in addition to its direct antimicrobial effect. Solid evidence to justify this treatment regimen for non-CF bronchiectasis, asthma, or sinusitis is still lacking, although a beneficial effect of long-term macrolide therapy has been found in small clinical trials on these subjects. Data from randomized trials of long-term macrolide treatment in COPD are conflicting. A sufficiently long duration of treatment and the careful selection of patients appears to be crucial. Aside from its beneficial effects, possible side effects of macrolide treatment should be taken into account, the most important of these being gastrointestinal upset and cardiac arrhythmias. Development of macrolide resistance among respiratory pathogens is very common during long-term macrolide treatment. Whether this finding is clinically significant is a matter of debate.
  Tissue stiffening is a hallmark of fibrotic disorders but has traditionally been regarded as an outcome of fibrosis, not a contributing factor to pathogenesis. In this study, we show that fibrosis induced by bleomycin injury in the murine lung locally increases median tissue stiffness sixfold relative to normal lung parenchyma. Across this pathophysiological stiffness range, cultured lung fibroblasts transition from a surprisingly quiescent state to progressive increases in proliferation and matrix synthesis, accompanied by coordinated decreases in matrix proteolytic gene expression. Increasing matrix stiffness strongly suppresses fibroblast expression of COX-2 (cyclooxygenase-2) and synthesis of prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)), an autocrine inhibitor of fibrogenesis. Exogenous PGE(2) or an agonist of the prostanoid EP2 receptor completely counteracts the proliferative and matrix synthetic effects caused by increased stiffness. Together, these results demonstrate a dominant role for normal tissue compliance, acting in part through autocrine PGE(2), in maintaining fibroblast quiescence and reveal a feedback relationship between matrix stiffening, COX-2 suppression, and fibroblast activation that promotes and amplifies progressive fibrosis.
  Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a genetic disease caused by recessive mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene and is associated with prevalent and chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa lung infections. Despite numerous studies that have sought to elucidate the role of CFTR in the innate immune response, the links between CFTR, innate immunity, and P. aeruginosa infection remain unclear. The present work highlights the zebrafish as a powerful model organism for human infectious disease, particularly infection by P. aeruginosa. Zebrafish embryos with reduced expression of the cftr gene (Cftr morphants) exhibited reduced respiratory burst response and directed neutrophil migration, supporting a connection between cftr and the innate immune response. Cftr morphants were infected with P. aeruginosa or other bacterial species that are commonly associated with infections in CF patients, including Burkholderia cenocepacia, Haemophilus influenzae, and Staphylococcus aureus. Intriguingly, the bacterial burden of P. aeruginosa was found to be significantly higher in zebrafish Cftr morphants than in controls, but this phenomenon was not observed with the other bacterial species. Bacterial burden in Cftr morphants infected with a P. aeruginosa DeltaLasR mutant, a quorum sensing-deficient strain, was comparable to that in control fish indicating that the regulation of virulence factors through LasR is required for enhancement of infection in the absence of Cftr. The zebrafish system provides a multitude of advantages for studying the pathogenesis of P. aeruginosa and for understanding the role that innate immune cells such as neutrophils play in the host response to acute bacterial infections commonly associated with cystic fibrosis.
  OBJECTIVE: Fibroproliferative diseases are common causes of morbidity and mortality. Interleukin-15 (IL-15) is a pleiotropic cytokine with multiple effects on cells of the immune system. Although IL-15 is also expressed in mesenchymal cells, its effects on the development of fibrosis are unknown. We have previously described an association between serum IL-15 levels and the extent of pulmonary fibrosis in the connective tissue disease systemic sclerosis, suggesting that IL-15 may have profibrotic effects. To test this hypothesis, we studied the effects of IL-15 on myofibroblast differentiation, an in vitro model of fibrosis development. METHODS: We used human fetal lung fibroblasts for the cytokine stimulation. As a marker of myofibroblast differentiation, α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) was analyzed by western blot and quantitative real-time PCR. The well-known profibrotic cytokine, transforming growth factor-β1(TGF-β1), was used for comparison, and TGF-β signaling paths were also studied. RESULTS: IL-15 did not induce α-SMA expression, a marker for myofibroblast differentiation. Unexpectedly, IL-15 counteracted TGF-β1-mediated α-SMA expression. Moreover, TGF-β1-induced expression of collagen, fibronectin and connective tissue growth factor was attenuated by addition of IL-15. There was no effect of IL-15 on early events in the TGF-β signaling cascades. CONCLUSION: IL-15 has anti-fibrotic properties that, speculatively however, may be insufficient in systemic sclerosis.
  Macitentan (ACT-064992), under development by Actelion Ltd in collaboration with Japanese licensee Nippon Shinyaku Co Ltd, is an orally active, non-peptide dual endothelin (ET)(A) and ET(B) receptor antagonist for the potential treatment of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). Scientific evidence suggests that the ET system may play an important role in the pathobiology of several cardiovascular diseases. A major therapeutic advance for the treatment of patients with PAH and IPF has been the pharmacological control of the activated ET system with ET receptor antagonists. Macitentan, because of its ability to target the tissues and to block both ET(A) and ET(B) receptors, is emerging as a new agent to treat cardiovascular disorders associated with chronic tissue ET system activation. The phase I and II clinical trials conducted to date have demonstrated that macitentan increases plasma levels of ET-1, displays dose-dependent pharmacokinetics, and was well tolerated in healthy volunteers and patients. At the time of publication, a phase II trial in patients with IPF and a phase III trial in patients with PAH was ongoing. It is expected that the results of these trials will validate the safety and efficacy of macitentan.
  Accumulating evidence suggests that gender can have a profound effect on incidence and severity of a variety of pulmonary diseases. To address the influence of gender on the development of silica-induced pulmonary fibrosis we instilled 0.2 g / Kg silica into male and female C57BL/6 mice and examined the fibrotic and inflammatory response at 14 days post-exposure. Both silica-exposed male and female mice had significant increases in total lung hydroxyproline compared to saline controls. However, silica-exposed female mice had significantly less total lung hydroxyproline than silica-exposed male mice. This observation was confirmed by color thresholding image analysis. Interestingly, silica-exposed female mice had significantly more inflammatory cells, the majority of which were macrophages, as well as higher levels of the macrophage-specific chemokines MCP-1 and CCL9 in whole lung lavage compared to silica-exposed male mice. We also show that at baseline, estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) mRNA expression is lower in female mice than in males and that ERalpha mRNA expression is decreased by silica exposure. Finally, we show that the response of ovariectomized female mice to silica instillation is similar to that of male mice. These observations taken together show that gender influences the lung response to silica.
  BACKGROUND: Initial pulmonary Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) is currently treated with intensive antibiotic therapy. At this stage, inflammation and tissue injury might have already occurred. Moreover, bacterial eradication is not always achieved. Prophylactic treatment against P aeruginosa seemed to have a preventive effect in retrospective studies. A study was undertaken to establish prospectively the effect of cycled prophylactic treatment on prevention of initial P aeruginosa infection in children with CF. METHODS: This 3-year triple-blind randomised controlled trial included 65 children with CF without P aeruginosa infection. Intervention existed of 3-monthly 3-week treatments with oral ciprofloxacin and inhaled colistin or both placebo controls. The primary outcome was P aeruginosa infection. Secondary outcomes were serum anti-Pseudomonas antibodies, pulmonary function, exacerbations, chest x-ray scores, inflammation parameters, respiratory pathogens and antimicrobial resistance. RESULTS: There was no difference in acquisition of P aeruginosa infection between the control and treatment groups (annual incidence 14% vs 11%; HR 0.738, 95% CI 0.299 to 1.822). Anti-Pseudomonas antibodies emerged earlier in the control group, but this difference had disappeared after 3 years. Chronic infection was observed in 19% of controls and 12% of treated patients. Decline in pulmonary function and other clinical outcomes did not differ between the two groups. In the treatment group, significantly fewer Gram-positive bacteria and Enterobacteriaceae were observed but there were more non-P aeruginosa non-fermentative Gram-negative bacteria. Conclusions Three-monthly cycled anti-P aeruginosa prophylaxis does not reduce the risk of initial and chronic infection in P aeruginosa-negative children with CF of all ages. Shifts in bacterial colonisation demand caution. Trial Registration Number ISRCTN 11604593.
  Pseudomonas aeruginosa is isolated in sputum cultures from cystic fibrosis (CF) patients and adults with bronchiectasis (BS) and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, but it is not well known if the characteristics of colonization in these latter patients are similar to those with CF. We examined 125 P. aeruginosa isolates obtained from 31 patients suffering from these diseases by pulsed field gel electrophoresis and genotyping of mucA and fpvA genes. The pattern of colonization, with dominance of a clonal strain and incidence of mucoid phenotypes, was similar in every group of patients; however, in some CF and BS patients, we detected the replacement or coexistence of 2 main clones. The main differences were found in the nucleotide position of less common mucA mutations, other than mucA22, and in the predominance of the different types of the pyoverdine receptor. Our results support a similar colonization pattern by P. aeruginosa in the different obstructive pulmonary diseases.
  Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder of lysosomal storage characterized by the triad of occulocutaneous albinism, bleeding diathesis, and pulmonary fibrosis. Sarcoidosis is a disease characterized by the development of noncaseating granulomas, most commonly affecting the lungs. The pathophysiology, histological findings, clinical symptoms, and treatment of the pulmonary manifestations of Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome are distinct from those of sarcoidosis. As patients with occulocutaneous and bleeding manifestations of Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome may also develop pulmonary fibrosis, the authors present this case to illustrate that pulmonary symptoms must be carefully evaluated in those with this syndrome because in this case, the patient developed underlying pulmonary sarcoidosis. To the authors' knowledge, this is the first documented case of Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome with concomitant pulmonary sarcoidosis.
  1,2-Dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane is used in cosmetics and other household products. 1,2-Dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane was nominated for study by the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences because of its widespread use as a component of numerous over-the-counter health care products. Male and female F344/N rats and B6C3F1 mice received 1,2-dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane (greater than 99% pure) in acetone (2-week and 3-month studies) or 95% ethanol (2-year studies) by dermal administration for 2 weeks, 3 months, or 2 years. Genetic toxicology studies were conducted in Salmonella typhimurium, Escherichia coli, and mouse peripheral blood erythrocytes. 2-WEEK STUDY IN RATS Groups of five male and five female rats were dermally administered 0, 37.5, 75, 150, 300, or 600 mg 1,2-dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane/kg body weight in acetone, 5 days per week for 16 days. All male and female rats survived to the end of the study. Mean body weights of dosed male and female rats were similar to those of the vehicle controls. Irritation, thickened skin, and ulcers were observed at the site of application in most dosed males and females. The thyroid gland weights of males administered 600 mg/kg were significantly less than those of the vehicle controls. The liver and kidney weights of 300 and 600 mg/kg females were significantly increased. A spectrum of nonneoplastic lesions including epidermal hyperplasia and hyperkeratosis, sebaceous gland hyperplasia, and dermal chronic active inflammation occurred at the site of application in all dosed groups of rats. Necrosis, ulcer, and parakeratosis of the epidermis occurred in most dosed groups of rats. 2-WEEK STUDY IN MICE Groups of five male and five female mice were dermally administered 0, 75, 150, 300, 600, or 1,200 mg/kg 1,2-dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane in acetone, 5 days per week for 16 days. All male and female mice survived to the end of the study. The final mean body weight of 300 mg/kg males was significantly less than that of the vehicle controls. Hyperactivity was observed in all dosed groups of mice. Irritation, thickened skin, and ulcers were observed at the site of application in dosed mice. The liver weights of 600 and 1,200 mg/kg males and 1,200 mg/kg females were significantly increased relative to those of the vehicle control groups. The heart weights of 600 and 1,200 mg/kg males and the kidney weights of 150 and 600 mg/kg males were significantly increased. The thymus weights of males administered 300 mg/kg or greater and those of all dosed groups of females were significantly decreased. Skin lesions at the site of application including epidermal hyperplasia, hyperkeratosis, parakeratosis, necrosis, and ulcers; dermal chronic active inflammation; and sebaceous gland hyperplasia occurred in all dosed groups of mice. Necrosis of the dermis occurred in most dosed groups of mice. 3-MONTH STUDY IN RATS Groups of 10 male and 10 female rats were dermally administered 0, 0.2, 0.6, 2, 6, or 18 mg/kg 1,2-dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane in acetone, 5 days per week for 14 weeks. All male rats survived to the end of the study. One 2 mg/kg female rat died on day 91. Mean body weights of dosed male and female rats were similar to those of the vehicle controls. Clinical findings of toxicity included thin hair coat in male and female rats and irritation at the site of application in males. At the site of application, the incidences of epidermal hyperplasia in males administered 0.6 mg/kg or greater and females administered 2 mg/kg or greater and the incidences of epidermal hyperkeratosis in all dosed groups of rats were significantly increased. In the dermis at the site of application, the incidences of chronic active inflammation in 6 and 18 mg/kg males and females administered 2 mg/kg or greater and sebaceous gland hyperplasia in males administered 6 or 18 mg/kg were significantly increased. 3-MONTH STUDY IN MICE Groups of 10 male and 10 female mice were dermally administered 0, 0.2, 0.6, 2, 6, or 18 mg/kg 1,2-dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane in acetone, 5 days per week for 14 weeks. All mice survived to the end of the study. Mean body weights of dosed male and female mice were similar to those of the vehicle controls. Irritation at the site of application was increased in male mice administered 18 mg/kg. The liver and lung weights of dosed females were generally significantly less than those of the vehicle control group. The incidences of minimal to mild epidermal hyperplasia and hyperkeratosis at the site of application were significantly increased in male and female mice administered 2 mg/kg or greater. The incidence of epidermal necrosis in 18 mg/kg males and the incidences of epidermal parakeratosis in 6 and 18 mg/kg males were significantly increased. In the dermis, the incidences of minimal to mild chronic active inflammation in 18 mg/kg males and in females administered 2 mg/kg or greater and fibrosis in 18 mg/kg males and females were significantly increased. The incidences of sebaceous gland hyperplasia at the site of application were significantly increased in males and females administered 6 or 18 mg/kg. 2-YEAR STUDY IN RATS Groups of 50 male and 50 female rats were dermally administered 0, 2, 6, or 18 mg/kg 1,2-dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane in 95% ethanol, 5 days a week for 104 to 105 weeks. Survival of males administered 18 mg/kg was significantly greater than that of the vehicle controls. Body weights of 18 mg/kg males and females were 7% less than those of the vehicle control groups after 1 year. Irritation at the site of application was reported in most males and females administered 6 or 18 mg/kg. There were no increases in the incidences of neoplasms in dosed rats. At the site of application, the incidences of epidermal hyperplasia in males and females administered 6 or 18 mg/kg and the incidences of hyperkeratosis of the epidermis in all dosed groups were significantly increased. The incidences of minimal to mild inflammation in the dermis at the site of application were significantly increased in males administered 6 or 18 mg/kg and in all dosed groups of females. The incidence of epidermal necrosis at the site of application in 18 mg/kg females was significantly increased. The incidences of inflammation of the nose were significantly increased in all dosed groups of male rats. The combined incidence of mammary gland fibroadenoma, adenoma, or adenocarcinoma occurred with a negative trend, and the incidence was significantly decreased in 6 mg/kg female rats. 2-YEAR STUDY IN MICE Groups of 50 male and 50 female mice were dermally administered 0, 0.6, 2, or 6 mg/kg 1,2-dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane in 95% ethanol, 5 days a week for 105 weeks. Survival of male and female mice was similar to that of the vehicle controls. Body weights of male and female dosed groups were similar to those of the vehicle control groups. No clinical findings were attributed to administration of 1,2-dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane. There were no increases in the incidences of neoplasms in dosed mice. At the site of application, the incidences of minimal to mild hyperplasia of the epidermis were significantly increased in 2 and 6 mg/kg males and in all dosed groups of females. The incidences of minimal to mild chronic active inflammation in the dermis were significantly increased in all dosed groups of females. GENETIC TOXICOLOGY 1,2-Dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane was not mutagenic in any of several strains of Salmonella typhimurium or Escherichia coli when tested with and without hamster and/or rat liver metabolic activation enzymes (S9). In addition, no increase in the frequency of micronucleated erythrocytes was observed in male or female mice treated for 3 months with 1,2-dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane by dermal application in acetone, indicating no potential for inducing chromosomal alterations in dividing cells in this test system. CONCLUSIONS Under the conditions of these 2-year dermal studies there was no evidence of carcinogenic activity of 1,2-dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane in male or female F344/N rats administered 2, 6, or 18 mg/kg. There was no evidence of carcinogenic activity of 1,2-dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane in male or female B6C3F1 mice administered 0.6, 2, or 6 mg/kg. 1,2-dibromo-2,4-dicyanobutane administration induced nonneoplastic lesions at the site of application in male and female rats and mice. Synonyms: 2-Bromo-2-(bromomethyl)glutaronitrile; 2-bromo-2-(bromomethyl)pentanedinitrile; methyldibromoglutaronitrile Trade names: Merguard 1190; Merguard 1200; Tektamer 38; Tektamer 38AD; Tektamer LV.
  Endothelin 1 (ET-1) is an endogenous peptide that promotes vasoconstriction, endothelial and smooth muscle cell (SMC) proliferation, and fibrosis. ET-1 receptor antagonists are an important treatment strategy for pulmonary arterial hypertension, but less effective in systemic vascular disease. This observation suggests a special role for ET-1 in the pulmonary circulation. We hypothesized that ET-1 contributes to the pathogenesis of pulmonary arterial hypertension, in part, by promoting pulmonary vascular SMC migration. ET-1 treatment promoted migration in 3 distinct types of cultured pulmonary SMC. Pulmonary SMC migration was blocked by an ETA receptor selective agonist and a combined ETA-ETB antagonist, but not by a selective ETB antagonist. In contrast to the effect on pulmonary SMCs, ET-1 had no effect on migration of aortic SMCs. Flow cytometry showed that the ETA receptor was expressed at comparable levels on pulmonary and aortic SMCs, excluding receptor density as an explanation for the divergent effect. ET-1-induced pulmonary SMC migration was blocked by the structurally distinct MEK inhibitors PD98059 and U0126, consistent with a role for ERK1/2 MAP kinase. By Western blot in cultured cells and immunohistochemistry in ex vivo vessels, ET-1 stimulated phosphorylation of ERK1/2 as efficaciously as platelet-derived growth factor in pulmonary, but not aortic, SMCs. In conclusion, ET-1 induces SMC migration, with the ETA receptor tightly coupled to ERK1/2 phosphorylation only in the pulmonary circulation. This finding may help explain the striking difference in the efficacy of endothelin receptor blockers for pulmonary hypertension as compared to that for systemic cardiovascular disease.
  Thy-1 is a cell surface glycoprotein present on normal lung fibroblasts but absent from the fibroblastic foci of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). Thy-1 correlates inversely with fibrogenic phenotypic characteristics and function as a âfibrosis suppressorâ. Promoter region hypermethylation can silence Thy-1 expression in fibroblastic foci, suggesting that epigenetic regulation is important in programming the fibrotic phenotype. We examined whether histone modifications are important in regulating Thy-1 expression in lung fibroblasts. Treatment with the histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) restored Thy-1 expression in Thy-1- cells in a time- and dosage- dependent fashion, and was associated with enrichment of histone acetylation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) demonstrated Thy-1 depletion of trimethylated H3K27 after 24 hours of TSA treatment, concurrent with enrichment of trimethylated H3K4 and acetylated H4. Bisulfite sequencing of the Thy-1 promoter region revealed demethylation of the previously hypermethylated CpG sites after treatment with TSA. Although Thy-1 was hypermethylated in Thy-1- lung fibroblasts, we observed that Thy-1- cells have lower global DNA methylation when compared to Thy-1+ lung fibroblasts, which was partially reversed by TSA treatment. TSA treatment upregulates total methyltransferases activity in these cells. Our data indicate that Thy-1 silencing is regulated by histone modifications in addition to promoter hypermethylation in lung fibroblasts. Additionally, our findings indicate that alteration of histone modifications alters DNA methylation. Understanding the molecular hierarchy of events with respect to reactivation of transcription and reversal of histone modification will be critical to understanding and modifying the regulated expression of Thy-1, a tumor- and fibrosis-suppressor gene.
  Cystic fibrosis (CF), the most common fatal monogenic disease in the US, results from mutations in CFTR, a chloride channel. The mechanisms by which CFTR mutations cause lung disease in CF are not fully defined, but may include altered ion and water transport across the airway epithelium and aberrant inflammatory and immune responses to pathogens within the airways. We have shown that Cftr-/- mice mount an exaggerated IgE response towards Aspergillus fumigatus (Af) with higher levels of IL-13 and IL-4, mimicking both the Th-2 biased immune responses seen in CF patients. Herein, we demonstrated that these aberrations are primarily due to Cftr deficiency in lymphocytes rather than in the epithelium. Adoptive transfer experiments with Cf splenocytes confer higher IgE response to Af as compared to hosts receiving wild-type splenocytes. The predilection of Cftr-deficient lymphocytes to mount Th2 responses with high IL-13 and IL-4 was confirmed by in vitro antigen recall experiments. Conclusive data on this phenomenon were obtained with conditional Cftr knockout mice, where mice lacking Cftr in T-cell lineages developed higher IgE than their wild-type littermate controls. Further analysis of Cftr-deficient lymphocytes revealed an enhanced intracellular Ca2+ flux in response to T cell receptor activation. This was accompanied by an increase in nuclear localization of the calcium-sensitive transcription factor NFAT, which could drive the IL-13 response. In summary, our data identified that CFTR dysfunction in T cells can lead directly to aberrant immune responses. These findings implicate the lymphocyte population as a potentially important target for CF therapeutics.
  Bone marrow-derived progenitor cells can fuse with cells of several different tissues, including lung, especially following injury. Despite many reports of cell fusion, few studies have examined the function of the resulting hybrid cells. We cocultured human multipotent stromal cells (hMSCs) and normal human bronchial epithelial cells (NHBEs) and observed the formation of hMSC/NHBE heterokaryons. The heterokaryons expressed several proteins characteristic of epithelial cells, such as keratin and occludin. Hybrid cells also expressed the mRNAs and proteins for 2 important ion channels that maintain bronchial and alveolar fluid balance: the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) and the amiloride-sensitive epithelial Na(+) channel (ENaC). By immunocytochemistry, CFTR was expressed in many hybrid cells but was absent or low in others. Whole-cell patch-clamp recordings demonstrated a glibenclamide-sensitive current in the presence of barium chloride, consistent with functional CFTR channels, in control NHBEs and hMSC/NHBE heterokaryons. Total cell capacitance measurements showed that the membrane surface area of heterokaryons was similar to that of NHBEs. Heterokaryons expressed the alpha- and gamma-ENaC subunits but did not express the beta-ENaC subunit, indicating the inability to form a complete ENaC channel. In addition, hybrid cells formed by the fusion of hMSCs with immortalized bronchial cells that expressed CFTR DeltaF508 did not lead to reprogramming of the hMSC nucleus and expression of wild-type CFTR mRNA. Our data show that reprogramming can be incomplete following fusion of adult progenitor cells and somatic cells and may lead to altered cell function.-Curril, I. M., Koide, M., Yang, C. H., Segal, A., Wellman, G. C., Spees, J. L. Incomplete reprogramming after fusion of human multipotent stromal cells and bronchial epithelial cells.
  Patients with adult congenital heart disease are at increased risk of ventricular arrhythmia (VA) and sudden cardiac death, although no clear predictors have been found. Ventricular programmed stimulation has been shown to predict clinical ventricular tachycardia and sudden death events, but the role of screening electrophysiology studies (S-EPSs) in this population remains poorly defined. Therefore, we sought to determine the prevalence of inducible VA and to evaluate the clinical predictors in a heterogeneous group of patients with adult congenital heart disease (> or =18 years old) undergoing S-EPSs at preoperative or interventional cardiac catheterization. Studies for the primary evaluation of clinical VA were excluded. The demographic, clinical, and diagnostic findings were compared between the patients with positive and negative findings. From 2005 to 2009, 80 patients (mean age 30 +/- 9 years) underwent S-EPSs, and 23 had inducible VA. The diagnoses for those with studies positive for VA included tetralogy of Fallot (n = 12), d-transposition of the great arteries (n = 6), pulmonary stenosis (n = 2), double outlet right ventricle (n = 1), double inlet left ventricle (n = 1), and Ebstein's anomaly (n = 1). Men were significantly more likely to have a S-EPS positive for VA (p = 0.015). Increasing QRS duration, decreasing peak oxygen uptake (percentage of predicted), and ventricular fibrosis with cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging were significantly associated with studies positive for VA (p <0.05). Combined fibrosis and a peak oxygen uptake <80% of predicted had 100% sensitivity for positive VA findings. In conclusion, almost 30% of those with adult congenital heart disease undergoing S-EPSs had inducible VA. A prolonged QRS duration, diminished exercise capacity, and the presence of ventricular fibrosis were significantly associated with findings positive for VA and might improve patient selection for screening evaluations.
  BACKGROUND: About 80% lung cancers belong to non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and more than 70% are in advanced stage. The aim of this study was to evaluate the clinical efficacy and toxicity of erlotinib and GP/TP regimen on advanced non-small cell lung cancer. METHODS: Ninety-one advanced NSCLC patients with different treatments from January 2007 to April 2009 in our hospital were retrospectively analyzed. Ninety-one patients were divided into the erlotinib and TP/GP group. Erlotinib group: received erlotinib 150 mg/dl TP/GP group: the original chemotherapy for advanced non-small cell lung cancer. The cycles were repeated for 21 days. The patients were given docetaxel (80 mg/m(2), d1) or gemcitabine (1 000 mg/m(2), d1, 8) +cisplatin (70 mg/m(2), d2); then the adverse reaction and clinical efficacy were recorded during 3 months. RESULTS: Total 91 patients were evaluated for efficacy. The total rate of effect was 23.33% in erlotinib group. The side effects were erythra, diarrhea and vomiting. Pulmonary fibrosis was found in one patient after 21 days. TP/GP group: the total rate of effect was 27.78% and 28% and the side effects were bone marrow depression and reaction of gastrointestinal tract. There were no significantly difference between the two groups in the total rate of effect (P>0.05). But the side effects were less in erlotinib group, and there were significantly difference between the two groups. CONCLUSIONS: Erlotinib on advanced non-small cell lung cancer shows more effectiveness and adverse reactions are tolerable. The further clinical study should be warranted.
  Lung infections caused by the opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa can present as a spectrum of clinical entities from a rapidly fatal pneumonia in a neutropenic patient to a multi-decade bronchitis in patients with cystic fibrosis. P. aeruginosa is ubiquitous in our environment, and one of the most versatile pathogens studied, capable of infecting a number of diverse life forms and surviving harsh environmental factors. It is also able to quickly adapt to new environments, including the lung, where it orchestrates virulence factors to acquire necessary nutrients, and if necessary, turn them off to prevent immune recognition. Despite these capabilities, P. aeruginosa rarely infects healthy human lungs. This is secondary to a highly evolved host defence mechanism that efficiently removes inhaled or aspirated pseudomonads. Many arms of the respiratory host defence have been elucidated using P. aeruginosa as a model pathogen. Human infections with P. aeruginosa have demonstrated the importance of the mechanical barrier functions including mucus clearance, and the innate immune system, including the critical role of the neutrophilic response. As more models of persistent or biofilm P. aeruginosa infections are developed, the role of the adaptive immune response will likely become more evident. Understanding the pathogenesis of P. aeruginosa, and the respiratory host defence response to it has, and will continue to, lead to novel therapeutic strategies to help patients.
  Abstract Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) is a rare pulmonary disorder caused by hypersensitivity to Aspergillus fumigatus. The prevalence is estimated to be about 1-2% in adult patients with asthma and 2-15% in patients with cystic fibrosis. In paediatric patients with asthma, only single case reports on ABPA exist. We report on a 13-year-old boy with allergic asthma complicated by ABPA. Despite the presentation of typical clinical symptoms, it took 6 years before he was diagnosed. The clinical course improved rapidly after ABPA therapy was started, and 12 months after diagnosis, the boy is still free of symptoms. Clinical symptoms of ABPA may be unspecific making a rapid diagnosis difficult in some cases. However, a delay in diagnosis and treatment increases the risk for irreversible lung damage. Once bronchiectasis has developed, the outcome is unfavourable. Thus, ABPA has to be considered in patients whose asthma remains uncontrolled despite adequate therapy.
  We present a case of interstitial nephritis and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI) in a patient treated with pemetrexed (500 mg/m(2)) for non-small cell lung cancer. Renal impairment and diabetes insipidus appeared after the first treatment cycle while he totally received four cycles of chemotherapy. There was not any significant myelosuppression and the patient was on regular supplementation with folic acid and vitamin B(12). He was not on any other medications and he did not receive any nephrotoxic agents. Kidney biopsy showed acute tubular necrosis together with interstitial inflammatory infiltrate of mononuclear cells and interstitial fibrosis occupying 25% of the cortex. There was not any improvement of renal function after a 2-week trial of oral prednisone. In the present case report, we review the literature for pemetrexed-induced renal toxicity and the possible mechanisms involved.
  Sarcoidosis is a complex disease with autoimmune basis and still unknown etiology. We have screened for mutations in the cystic fibrosis conductance regulator (CFTR) gene and genotyped single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the tumor necrosis factor (TNF), interferon alpha-10 (IFNA10), IFNA17, and interferon gamma (IFNG) genes in 89 Greek patients with sarcoidosis and 212 control subjects to detect possible association between them and the risk for developing sarcoidosis. We have found a statistically significant increase (p = 6.1 x 10(-8)) of CFTR mutation carriers in the population of patients with sarcoidosis versus the control population. A difference was also noted within the group of patients with sarcoidosis where the ones with CFTR mutations suffered more frequently from dyspnea than those without (p = 5 x 10(-6)). Our study did not reproduce the associations previously noted with the TNF, IFNA10, IFNA17, and IFNG genes, which highlights the genetic complexity of the disorder and is in agreement with previous studies showing that CFTR might be an important factor in the clinical course of the disease.
  The Purines 2010: Adenine Nucleosides and Nucleotides in Biomedicine meeting, held in Tarragona, Spain, included topics covering new findings in the field of purinergic signaling and the development of purine-based drugs. This conference report highlights selected presentations on developments in purinerigic signaling, medicinal chemistry, the therapeutic potential of purine-based drugs, and the role of purines and adenosine receptors in neurodegenerative disorders, sickle cell disease, bone homeostasis, pulmonary fibrosis and pain. Investigational drugs discussed include CF-101 (Can-Fite BioPharma Ltd/NIH/Kwang Dong Pharmaceutical Co Ltd/Seikagaku Corp) and denufosol tetrasodium (Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Therapeutics Inc/Inspire Pharmaceuticals Inc).
  PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Recent literature on Aspergillus fumigatus infection and allergy in cystic fibrosis have expanded our understanding of many aspects of allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, and bring new attention to A. fumigatus airways infection and A. fumigatus allergy without allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA). RECENT FINDINGS: ABPA, A. fumigatus infection and A. fumigatus allergy without ABPA all likely worsen cystic fibrosis (CF) lung disease. Studies examining utility of new serologic assays for diagnosing ABPA include evaluations of standardized measurement of A. fumigatus-specific IgG, serum chemokine TARC levels, and recombinant A. fumigatus allergens; as yet, none appear ideal. Although oral glucocorticoids remain primary therapy, toxicity and incomplete control have led to an ongoing search for further safe and effective agents including itraconazole and voriconazole, intravenous pulse methylprednisolone, nebulized amphotericin B and omalizumab. Little controlled treatment data is available. SUMMARY: Diagnosis of CF-ABPA remains difficult, but improvements in serologic assays are occurring. Treatment remains in many cases unsatisfactory, and new agents offer promise but await proper controlled trials of safety and efficacy. A. fumigatus airway infection and A. fumigatus allergy without ABPA are emerging as further complications of A. fumigatus respiratory colonization in patients with CF, but prospective studies are needed to corroborate largely retrospective findings.
  Cystic fibrosis (CF) is one of the most common autosomal recessive diseases among Caucasians caused by a mutation in the CFTR gene. However, the clinical outcome of CF pulmonary disease varies remarkably even in patients with the same CFTR genotype. This has led to a search for genetic modifiers located outside the CFTR gene. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of functional variants in prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase genes (COX1 and COX2) on the severity of lung disease in CF patients. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first time when analysis of COX1 and COX2 as potential CF modifiers is provided. The study included 94 CF patients homozygous for F508del mutation of CFTR. To compare their clinical condition, several parameters were recorded, e.g. a unique clinical score: disease severity status (DSS). To analyse the effect of non-CFTR genetic polymorphisms on the clinical course of CF patients, the whole coding region of COX1 and selected COX2 polymorphisms were analysed. Statistical analysis of genotype-phenotype associations revealed a relationship between the heterozygosity status of identified polymorphisms and better lung function. These results mainly concern COX2 polymorphisms: -765G>C and 8473T>C. The COX1 and COX2 polymorphisms reducing COX protein levels had a positive effect on all analysed clinical parameters. This suggests an important role of these genes as protective modifiers of pulmonary disease in CF patients, due to inhibition of arachidonic acid conversion into prostaglandins, which probably reduces the inflammatory process.
  Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are enzymes that balance the acetylation activities of histone acetyltransferases (HATs) on chromatin remodeling and play essential roles in regulating gene transcription. In the past several years, the role of HDACs in cancer initiation and progression, as well as the therapeutic effects of HDAC inhibitors in various types of cancer, has been well studied. Recent studies indicated that HDAC activity is also associated with the development and progression of some chronic diseases characterized by fibrosis, including chronic kidney disease, cardiac hypertrophy, and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Here we review what is known about HDACs in the progression of tissue fibrosis and the potential applications of HDAC inhibitors in the treatment of disorders associated with fibroblast activation and proliferation.
  Prostaglandin (PG) D2 exerts contrasting activities in the inflamed lung via two receptors, the D prostanoid receptor (DP) and the Chemoattractant receptor-homologous molecule expressed on Th2 lymphocytes (CRTH2). DP activation is mainly known to inhibit pro-inflammatory cell functions. We tested here the effect of a DP specific agonist, BW245C ((4S)-(3-[(3R,S)-3-cyclohexyl-3-hydroxypropyl]-2,5-dioxo)-4-imidazolidineheptanoic acid), on pulmonary fibroblast functions in vitro and in a mouse model of lung fibrosis induced by bleomycin. DP mRNA expression was detected in cultured mouse lung primary fibroblasts and human fetal lung fibroblasts (HFL-1) and found up- and down-regulated by interleukin-13 and transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta, respectively. While micromolar concentrations of BW245C and PGD2 did not affect mouse fibroblast collagen synthesis or differentiation in myofibroblasts, they both inhibited fibroblast basal and TGF-beta-induced proliferation in vitro. The repeated administration of BW245C (500 nmol/kg bw instilled trans-orally in the lungs 2 days before and 3 times per week during 3 weeks) in bleomycin-treated mice significantly decreased both inflammatory cell recruitment and collagen accumulation in the lung (21 d). Our results indicate that BW245C can reduce lung fibrosis in part via its activity on fibroblast proliferation and suggest that DP activation should be considered as a new therapeutic target in fibro-proliferative lung diseases.
  In recent decades, advances in nanotechnology engineering have given rise to the rapid development of many novel applications in the biomedical field. However, studies into the health and safety of these nanomaterials are still lacking. The main concerns are the adverse effects to health caused by acute or chronic exposure to nanoparticles (NPs), especially in the workplace environment. The lung is one of the main routes of entry for NPs into the body and, hence, a likely site for accumulation of NPs. Once NPs enter the interstitial air spaces and are quickly taken up by alveolar cells, they are likely to induce toxic effects. In this review, we highlight the different aspects of lung toxicity resulting from NP exposure, such as generation of oxidative stress, DNA damage and inflammation leading to fibrosis and pneumoconiosis, and the underlying mechanisms causing pulmonary toxicity.
  Biliary fibrosis and resultant cirrhosis are among the most common outcomes of chronic liver diseases. Currently, liver transplantation remains the only effective treatment. In seeking alternative therapeutic approaches, we focused on the potential use of the human Amniotic Membrane (AM). Indeed, AM has gained increasing importance for its anti-scarring, anti-inflammatory and wound healing properties, as well as for the multipotent differentiation ability and immunomodulatory features of AM-derived cells. Intriguingly, we have recently demonstrated that placenta-derived cells reduce lung fibrosis in bleomycin-treated mice, and that AM patches reduce post-ischemic cardiac injury in rats. Hence, we have now investigated the effects of human AM on biliary fibrosis induced in rats through the Bile Duct Ligation (BDL) procedure. A fragment of human AM was applied onto the liver surface after BDL and the effects on fibrosis establishment and progression were evaluated at different time points in comparison with fibrosis progression in control BDL rats. The degree of liver fibrosis was first assessedby the semiquantitative Knodell scoring system and, thereafter, by digital image morphometric analysis to quantify the area occupied by ductular reaction, activated myofibroblasts and collagen deposition. We demonstrated a significant reduction in the severity of BDL-induced fibrosis in AMtreated rats. Indeed, while fibrosis progressed rapidly in control BDL rats, leading to cirrhosis within 6 weeks, AM-treated rats showed confined fibrosis at the portal/periportal area with no signs of cirrhosis, and a reduction in collagen deposition to about 50% of levels observed in control BDL rats. In addition, the AM was able to significantly slow the gradual progression of the ductular reaction and reduce, at all time points, the area occupied by activated myofibroblasts. These findings suggest that human AM, when applied as a patch onto the liver surface, might inhibit fibrosis progression in BDL-injured livers, and could protect against hepatic damage associated with fibrotic degeneration.
  INTRODUCTION: Whether acute pancreatitis can occur in pancreatically insufficient individuals with cystic fibrosis remains a matter of debate. CASE PRESENTATION: We describe a case of acute pancreatitis occurring in a 52-year-old Caucasian Australian man with moderately severe cystic fibrosis lung disease and pancreatic insufficiency. An inflammatory mass within the head of his pancreas was confirmed using computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging and pancreatic biopsy, but serum amylase and lipase remained normal throughout the acute phase of his illness. His symptoms and the pancreatic mass resolved following the insertion of a biliary stent and the introduction of ursodeoxycholic acid. CONCLUSION: Our case report highlights the potential for acute pancreatitis to occur in patients with pancreatic insufficiency and cystic fibrosis. We further demonstrate that conventional biochemical markers that are normally assessed to confirm the diagnosis may not be of particular use. As patients with cystic fibrosis survive into their fourth and fifth decades of life, atypical presentations of acute pancreatitis may become more common.
  Summary Introduction: Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is characterized by the development of fibrosis of skin and internal organs that is associated with vascular damage. However, its related parameters have not been fully explored. The aim of this study was to investigate endothelial function in SSc and its relationship with systolic pulmonary artery pressure and systemic arterial compliance (SAC). Methods: We studied 14 SSc females (4 with diffuse and 10 with limited cutaneous form of the disease) and 14 healthy controls matched for age and for cardiovascular risk factors. Endothelium-dependent dilation (i.e. flow-mediated) and endothelium-independent (i.e. nitroglycerin-induced) dilation of the brachial artery were measured as the percentage of change from baseline (FMD and NMD, respectively). In patients with SSc, SAC, cardiac output (CO), systemic arterial resistance and pulmonary artery pressure were estimated using echocardiography Doppler. Results: Heart rate, brachial artery pressure and body mass index did not differ between patients with SSc and controls. Flow-mediated vasodilation (FMD) and NMD were significantly decreased in patients with SSc (10.3 +/- 8.6 versus 26.6 +/- 7.4%, P<0.001; 24.2 +/- 8.4 versus 33.3 +/- 10.1%, P<0.001, respectively). Postischaemia reactive hyperaemia was lower in patients with SSc (275 +/- 185 versus 618 +/- 366%, P<0.001). FMD and nitrate-mediated dilation (NMD) were associated with CO, but not with SAC; moreover, FMD correlated with pulmonary artery pressure and peripheral arterial resistance conversely to NMD. Conclusions: Endothelium function in SSc is impaired independently to SAC. Furthermore, the severity of both small artery and pulmonary artery involvement may impact on endothelium-dependant function.
  Human idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and non-specific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP) have been proposed to be attributable to oxidative stress. The nuclear factor, erythroid derived 2, like protein (NRF2)-sulfiredoxin-1 (SRX1) pathway was hypothesized to be associated with the pathogenesis of human pulmonary fibrosis. Several methods including digital morphometry were used in the assessment of the cell-specific localization and expression of NRF2 and SRX1 and selected proteins linked to their activation/stability in human IPF/usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP) and NSIP lung. The proteins of the NRF2 pathway were localized in the hyperplastic alveolar epithelium and inflammatory cells in IPF and NSIP, but were absent in the fibroblastic foci characteristic of IPF. Morphometric evaluation revealed NRF2 and KEAP1 to be significantly elevated in the hyperplastic alveolar epithelium compared with the normal alveolar epithelium, and NRF2 was remarkably expressed in the nuclear compartment of the hyperplastic cells. SRX1 was expressed mainly in alveolar macrophages, and the number of SRX1-positive macrophages/surface area was elevated in NSIP, a disease which contains more marked inflammatory reaction compared with the IPF/UIP lung. The expression of the NRF2 pathway in human IPF and NSIP is further evidence that the pathogenesis of human fibrotic lung diseases is oxidant-mediated and originates from the alveolar epithelium.
  SUMMARY: Lung disease in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) is characterized by recurrent bacterial respiratory infections and intense airway inflammation. Pattern recognition receptors such as Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) and TLR4 identify bacterial pathogens and activate the innate immune response. We therefore hypothesized that increased expression of these receptors would be found on circulating immune cells from children with CF. A cohort of 66 young children (median age 3 years) with CF was studied and compared to both healthy controls (n = 14) and children without CF who were being investigated for recurrent respiratory infections (non-CF disease controls; n = 17) of a similar age. Surface expression of TLR2 and TLR4 on peripheral blood monocytes was analyzed using flow cytometry. TLR4 expression was significantly higher in patients with CF compared to healthy controls (P = 0.017) and non-CF disease controls (P = 0.025) but did not vary according to the presence or absence of pulmonary infection with Gram-negative or Gram-positive bacteria (P = 0.387) in the CF group. In contrast, TLR2 expression was similar across all three study groups (P = 0.930). The increased surface expression of TLR4 seen in young children with CF appears to be related to having CF per se and not related to current pulmonary infection.
  RATIONALE: Loss of lung function in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) is associated with increased mortality and varies between individuals and over time. Predicting this decline could improve patient management. OBJECTIVES: To develop simple pulmonary outcome prediction (POP) tools to estimate lung function at age 6 in patients aged 2-5 years (POP(2-5)) and lung function change over a 4-year period in patients aged 6-17 years (POP(6-17)). METHODS: Analyses were conducted using patients from the Epidemiologic Study of CF (ESCF). To be included in any analysis, patients had to have 1 year of clinical history recorded in ESCF prior to a clinically stable routine Index Clinic Visit (ICV). In addition to this criterion, for the POP(2-5) tool patients had to be between 2 and 5 years old at ICV and have a second clinically stable visit with spirometric measures at age 6. For the POP(6-17) tool, patients had to be between the ages of 6 and 17 years old at an ICV that included spirometric measures and had to have a second clinically stable visit with spirometric measures from 3 to 5 years after ICV. All patients enrolled in ESCF who met these inclusion criteria were studied. POP(2-5) and POP(6-17) populations were further divided into development groups (with ICV before January 1, 1998) and validation groups (with ICV after that date). Development groups were used to model forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV(1)) percent predicted at age 6 years (for POP(2-5)) and annualized FEV(1)% predicted change from ICV to the second visit (for POP(6-17)) by multivariable linear regression using age, sex, weight-for-age percentile, cough, sputum production, clubbing, crackles, wheeze, sinusitis, number of exacerbations requiring intravenous antibiotics in the past year, elevated liver enzymes, pancreatic enzyme use, and respiratory tract culture status, plus height-for-age percentile (POP(2-5)) and index FEV(1) (POP(6-17)). Integer-based POP(2-5) and POP(6-17) tools created from selected variables were evaluated by Pearson correlation and then prospectively validated with separate data collected later from ESCF patients with ICV after January 1, 1998. MAIN RESULTS: POP(2-5) and POP(6-17) development groups included 2,709 and 6,113 patients and validation groups included 3,458 and 7,086 patients, respectively. Variables retained were weight-for-age percentile, clubbing, crackles, wheeze, number of exacerbations, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa culture status (both tools), daily cough (POP(2-5)), and age, sex, and index FEV(1)% predicted (POP(6-17)). Correlation coefficients for POP(2-5) and POP(6-17) tools prospectively applied to validation groups were +0.32 and +0.37, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: These simple integer-based POP algorithms employ variables available at clinic visits and can be used to predict the probability of different future pulmonary outcomes for individual patients and patient populations. Pediatr. Pulmonol. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
  BACKGROUND: There is minimal literature available on the long-term outcome of pediatric non-cystic fibrosis (CF) bronchiectasis. AIM: To document 5-year outcomes of children with chest computerized tomography (CT) scan diagnosed bronchiectasis from a tertiary New Zealand (NZ) respiratory clinic. METHODS: Review of a clinical database identified 91 children. Demographics, clinical data, lung function, chest X-ray (CXR), sputum, presumed etiology, admission data, and the NZ deprivation index (NZDep) were collected. Univariate and multivariate regression were used to correlate clinical findings with lung function data and CXR scores using the Brasfield Scoring System. RESULTS: Of the 91 children, 53 (59%) were Pacific Island, 22 (24%) Maori, 14 (15%) European, and 2 (2%) Other. The median follow-up period was 6.7 years (range 5.0-15.3 years) and median age at diagnosis was 7.3 years (range 11 months-16 years). Lung function data (n = 64) showed a mean decline of -1.6% predicted/year. In 30 children lung function declined (mean FEV(1) -4.4% predicted/year, range 1-17%), remained stable in 13 and improved in 21 children (mean FEV(1) of +3% predicted/year, range 1-15%). Reduced lung function was associated with male gender, chronic Haemophilus influenzae infection, longevity of disease, and Maori and Pacific Island ethnicity. There was a significant correlation with FEV(1) and CXR score at beginning (n = 47, r = 0.45, P = 0.001) and end (n = 26, r = 0.59, P = 0.002) of the follow-up period. The only variable consistently related to CXR score was chronic Haemophilus influenzae infection occurring in 27 (30%) (r(2) = 0.52, P = <0.0001). Only four children were chronically infected with Pseudomonas species. Six children died. CONCLUSION: In our experience despite management in a tertiary multidisciplinary bronchiectasis clinic, progression of lung disease continues in a group of children and young adults. Pediatr. Pulmonol. (c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
  Oxidative stress in lung often occurs in humans during acute lung injury (ALI) and in the acute respiratory distress syndrome. The lung inflammatory response may proceed to the development of pulmonary fibrosis, a devastating complication that occurs in premature infants after prolonged exposure to high oxygen concentrations. Oxidant-related ALI can be induced by airway deposition of lipopolysaccharide or IgG immune complexes, resulting in activation of recruited neutrophils and residential macrophages, whose oxidants and proteases produce reversible ALI. In the presence of a powerful trigger of leukocytes (phorbol myristate acetate), or following intrapulmonary deposition of enzymes that generate oxidants, extensive endothelial and epithelial damage and destruction occurs, overwhelming repair mechanisms of lung and resulting in pulmonary fibrosis. How residential or circulating stem cells participate in regeneration of damaged/destroyed cells may provide clues regarding therapy in humans who are experiencing lung inflammatory damage.
  Tissue fibrosis is believed to be a manifestation of dysregulated repair following injury, in association with impaired reepithelialization, and aberrant myofibroblast activation and proliferation. Numerous pathways have been linked to the pathogenesis of fibrotic lung disease, including the death receptor Fas, which contributes to apoptosis of lung epithelial cells. A redox imbalance also has been implicated in disease pathogenesis, although mechanistic details whereby oxidative changes intersect with profibrotic signaling pathways remain elusive. Oxidation of cysteines in proteins, such as S-glutathionylation (PSSG), is known to act as a regulatory event that affects protein function. This manuscript will discuss evidence that S-glutathionylation regulates death receptor induced apoptosis, and the potential implications for cysteine oxidations in the pathogenesis of in fibrotic lung disease.
  alpha-Defensins, antimicrobial peptides produced mainly by neutrophils, have been reported to be associated with a wide variety of lung diseases, including idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), cystic fibrosis (CF), and diffuse panbronchiolitis (DPB). In each disease, alpha-defensins are located in different areas, such as around the alveolar septa in IPF and around the airways in CF and DPB, suggesting that alpha-defensins play different roles. Meanwhile, growth factors are known to contribute to IPF, CF, and DPB. alpha-Defensins are known to induce interleukin (IL)-8 in airway epithelial cells, but the effects of alpha-defensins on the release of growth factors from various components in the lung have not been sufficiently investigated. In the present study, the in vitro effects of human neutrophil peptide (HNP)-1 (a subtype of alpha-defensin) on the expressions of IL-8 and growth factors in lung fibroblasts, bronchial epithelial cells, and alveolar epithelial cells were examined. HNP-1 mainly enhanced the expression of IL-8 in epithelial cells, whereas it enhanced transforming growth factor-beta and vascular endothelial growth factor expressions in lung fibroblasts. These results suggest that alpha-defensins play different roles in the pathogenesis of IPF, CF, and DPB according to the location in the lung where the alpha-defensins are mainly produced.
  The development of methods to achieve efficient reprogramming of human cells while avoiding the permanent presence of reprogramming transgenes represents a critical step towards the use of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) for clinical purposes, such as disease modeling or reconstituting therapies. While several methods exist for generating iPSC free of reprogramming transgenes from mouse cells or neonatal normal human tissues, a sufficiently efficient reprogramming system is still needed in order to achieve the widespread derivation of disease-specific iPSC from humans with inherited or degenerative diseases. Here we report the use of a humanized version of a single lentiviral 'stem cell cassette' vector in order to accomplish efficient reprogramming of normal or diseased skin fibroblasts obtained from humans of virtually any age. Simultaneous transfer of either 3 or 4 reprogramming factors into human target cells using this single vector allows derivation of human iPSC containing a single excisable viral integration, that upon removal generates human iPSC free of integrated transgenes. As a proof of principle, here we apply this strategy to generate >100 lung disease-specific iPSC lines from individuals with a variety of diseases affecting the epithelial, endothelial, or interstitial compartments of the lung, including cystic fibrosis, alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency-related emphysema, scleroderma (SSc), and sickle cell disease. Moreover, we demonstrate that human iPSC generated with this approach have the ability to robustly differentiate into definitive endoderm in vitro, the developmental precursor tissue of lung epithelia.
  ET (endothelin)-1 was first described as a potent vasoconstrictor. Since then, many other deleterious properties mediated via its two receptors, ETA and ETB, have been described, such as inflammation, fibrosis and hyperplasia. These effects, combined with a wide tissue distribution of the ET system, its up-regulation in pathological situations and a local autocrine/paracrine activity due to a high tissue receptor binding, make the tissue ET system a key local player in end-organ damage. Furthermore, ET-1 interacts in tissues with other systems such as the RAAS (renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system) to exert its effects. In numerous genetically modified animal models, non-specific or organ-targeted ET-1 overexpression causes intense organ damage, especially hypertrophy and fibrosis, in the absence of haemodynamic changes, confirming a local activity of the ET system. ET receptor antagonists have been shown to prevent and sometimes reverse these tissue alterations in an organ-specific manner, leading to long-term benefits and an improvement in survival in different animal models. Potential for such benefits going beyond a pure haemodynamic effect have also been suggested by clinical trial results in which ET receptor antagonism decreased the occurrence of new digital ulcers in patients with systemic sclerosis and delayed the time to clinical worsening in patients with PAH (pulmonary arterial hypertension). The tissue ET system allows therapeutic interventions to provide organ selectivity and beneficial effects in diseases associated with tissue inflammation, hypertrophy or fibrosis.
  Different intervention trials have been so far conducted and others are ongoing to evaluate the effect of increased intake of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) in the prevention of several disorders affecting lungs and airways. They have been focused on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, acute respiratory distress syndrome, acute lung injury, pulmonary fibrosis, alteration of lung function in cystic fibrosis, as well as asthma and cachexia in lung cancer patients. Their outcomes are not always consistent, but, if beneficial effects were observed, they have been related mainly to the anti-inflammatory action of n-3 PUFAs. On the contrary, trials investigating their effects on the development and progression of lung cancer are still not available. This in spite of the huge number of equivalent studies performed on other kind of cancers (breast, colon and prostate cancer), which share with lung cancer the highest incidence in Western countries and an elevated sensitivity to chemoprevention. Contrasting results were also obtained by the few epidemiological studies available on lung cancer. However, different experimental studies, performed in vivo and in vitro, provided strong indications of the anti-tumor action of n-3 PUFAs against lung cancer, and identified molecular mechanisms for their action. In this review our effort will concentrate in critically reviewing the current evidence for the beneficial effect of n-3 PUFAs in inflammatory and neoplastic disorders of lungs and airways, and in identifying possible molecular mechanisms underlying their effects.
  Schistosomiasis is one of the most prevalent infectious diseases, endemic in more than 70 countries, mainly within the developing world. More than 200 million people might be infected worldwide; about 20 million of those might develop severe disease. The hepatosplenic form of schistosomiasis is the most prevalent form of chronic disease, characterised by the presence of periportal fibrosis and portal hypertension. Pulmonary hypertension is a well-recognised complication of hepatosplenic schistosomiasis. Recent prevalent studies revealed that schistosomiasis patients may develop precapillary and postcapillary forms of pulmonary hypertension, reinforcing the role of invasive haemodynamic measurements for the proper diagnosis. These studies also demonstrated that schistosomiasis associated pulmonary arterial hypertension may represent the most prevalent form of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). Many aspects regarding the appropriate management of Sch-PAH patients still remain to be elucidated, as the use of specific PAH therapy. Although the ongoing control programmes that started within the 1980s have clearly improved the schistosomiasis cenario worldwide, Sch-PAH will be seen for decades after proper control is reached, strengthening the current need for comprehensive studies aiming to clarify the multiple mechanisms involved in the pathophysiology of this particular subgroup of PAH.
  Accumulation of unwanted/misfolded proteins in aggregates has been observed in airways of patients with cystic fibrosis (CF), a life-threatening genetic disorder caused by mutations in the gene encoding the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). Here we show how the defective CFTR results in defective autophagy and decreases the clearance of aggresomes. Defective CFTR-induced upregulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and tissue transglutaminase (TG2) drive the crosslinking of beclin 1, leading to sequestration of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI(3)K) complex III and accumulation of p62, which regulates aggresome formation. Both CFTR knockdown and the overexpression of green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged-CFTR(F508del) induce beclin 1 downregulation and defective autophagy in non-CF airway epithelia through the ROS-TG2 pathway. Restoration of beclin 1 and autophagy by either beclin 1 overexpression, cystamine or antioxidants rescues the localization of the beclin 1 interactome to the endoplasmic reticulum and reverts the CF airway phenotype in vitro, in vivo in Scnn1b-transgenic and Cftr(F508del) homozygous mice, and in human CF nasal biopsies. Restoring beclin 1 or knocking down p62 rescued the trafficking of CFTR(F508del) to the cell surface. These data link the CFTR defect to autophagy deficiency, leading to the accumulation of protein aggregates and to lung inflammation.
  System-level modeling is beginning to be used to decipher high throughput data in the context of disease. In this study, we present an integration of expression microarray data with a genome-scale metabolic reconstruction of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in the context of a chronic cystic fibrosis (CF) lung infection. A genome-scale reconstruction of P. aeruginosa metabolism was tailored to represent the metabolic states of two clonally related lineages of P. aeruginosa isolated from the lungs of a CF patient at different points over a 44-month time course, giving a mechanistic glimpse into how the bacterial metabolism adapts over time in the CF lung. Metabolic capacities were analyzed to determine how tradeoffs between growth and other important cellular processes shift during disease progression. Genes whose knockouts were either significantly growth reducing or lethal in silico were also identified for each time point and serve as hypotheses for future drug targeting efforts specific to the stages of disease progression.
  RATIONALE: Infection with Burkholderia cepacia complex (BCC) bacteria in cystic fibrosis (CF) is associated with an unpredictable rate of pulmonary decline. Some BCC, but not others, elaborate copious mucoid exopolysaccharide endowing them with a gross mucoid phenotype, the clinical significance of which has not been described. OBJECTIVES: To determine if there was a correlation between bacterial mucoid phenotype, as assessed in a semi-quantitative manner from plate culture, and severity of disease as assessed by the rate of decline in lung function. METHODS: We performed a retrospective clinical review of 100 CF patients attending the Vancouver clinics between 1981 and 2007 and analyzed the rate of lung function decline (% predicted FEV1). MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Patients infected exclusively with nonmucoid BCC had a more rapid decline in lung function (annual FEV1 change: -8.51% +/- 2.41) than those infected with mucoid bacteria (-3.01% +/- 1.09; p < 0.05). Linear mixed-effects data modeling revealed a statistically significant inverse association between semi-quantitative mucoid exopolysaccharide production and rate of decline of lung function. In vitro incubation of BCC with ceftazidime and ciprofloxacin but not meropenem caused conversion of BCC from mucoid to nonmucoid CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest an inverse correlation between the quantity of mucoid exopolysaccharide production by BCC bacteria and rate of decline in CF lung function. Certain antibiotics may induce a change in bacterial morphology that enhances their virulence. A simple in vitro test of bacterial mucoidy may be useful in predicting the rate of decline of respiratory function in CF.
  Rationale Fibrotic response to lung injury depends upon development of a fibrogenic population of myofibroblasts. The importance of resident interstitial fibroblasts and role of TGFbeta in this process is unclear. Objectives To define the importance of TGFbeta signalling in resident lung fibroblasts in the development of experimental pulmonary fibrosis. Methods A compound genetic strategy in which mice homozygous for a floxed TbetaRII allele were crossed with a transgenic strain harbouring a fibroblast-specific transgene encoding ligand-dependent Cre-recombinase was employed. TbetaRII was deleted by postnatal administration of tamoxifen over 5 days to compound mutant mice with appropriate littermate controls. Illumina microarray gene profiling and qRT-PCR was used to confirm anergy to TGFbeta in explanted lung fibroblasts. Bleomycin lung injury was used to induce lung fibrosis which was analysed by histology and biochemical methods. Immunofluorescence was used to define cell populations after lung injury. Measurements and main results There was significant attenuation of fibrosis in mice after deletion of TbetaRII in resident fibroblasts. At 7 days after injury the number of fibrocytes and myofibroblasts was substantially reduced. Potential regulators of fibrosis were suggested by gene expression profiles that identified key candidate profibrotic genes, including Ctgf and endothelin-1 expressed by wildtype but not mutant lung fibroblasts. Conclusions Intact TGFbeta signalling in resident pulmonary fibroblasts is essential for pulmonary fibrosis to develop and our data support a key regulatory role of these cells in determining fibrocyte recruitment and myofibroblast differentiation.
  Cystic fibrosis (CF) is caused by mutations in the CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) that prevent its proper folding and trafficking to the apical membrane of epithelial cells. Absence of cAMP-mediated Cl(-) secretion in CF airways causes poorly hydrated airway surfaces in CF patients, and this condition is exacerbated by excessive Na(+) absorption. The mechanistic link between missing CFTR and increased Na(+) absorption in airway epithelia has remained elusive, although substantial evidence implicates hyperactivity of the epithelial Na(+) channel (ENaC). ENaC is known to be activated by selective endoproteolysis of the extracellular domains of its α- and γ-subunits, and it was recently reported that ENaC and CFTR physically associate in mammalian cells. We confirmed this interaction in oocytes by co-immunoprecipitation and found that ENaC associated with wild-type CFTR was protected from proteolytic cleavage and stimulation of open probability. In contrast, ΔF508 CFTR, the most common mutant protein in CF patients, failed to protect ENaC from proteolytic cleavage and stimulation. In normal airway epithelial cells, ENaC was contained in the anti-CFTR immunoprecipitate. In CF airway epithelial cultures, the proportion of full-length to total α-ENaC protein signal was consistently reduced compared with normal cultures. Our results identify limiting proteolytic cleavage of ENaC as a mechanism by which CFTR down-regulates Na(+) absorption.
  BACKGROUND: The number of adults living with cystic fibrosis (CF) is increasing, necessitating an assessment of knowledge in this growing population. METHODS: A questionnaire assessing CF knowledge was completed by 100 CF patients (median age: 26.0years, range 17-49years; median FEV(1): 57.0% predicted, range 20-127% predicted). Level of knowledge was correlated with clinical and sociodemographic characteristics. RESULTS: Questionnaire validation showed acceptable internal consistency (alpha=0.75) and test-retest reliability (0.94). Patients had fair overall understanding of CF (mean=72.4%, SD=13.1), with greater knowledge of lung and gastrointestinal topics (mean=81.6%, SD=11.6) than reproduction and genetics topics (mean=57.9%, SD=24.1). Females and those with post-secondary education scored significantly higher (p<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: This study validated a questionnaire that can be utilized to assess CF knowledge. Although CF patients understand most aspects of their disease, knowledge deficits are common - particularly regarding genetics and reproduction - and should be considered when developing CF education programs.
  Within the group of Idiopathic Interstitial Pneumonias (IIPs), above all Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis (IPF) poses a considerable diagnostic and therapeutic problem. Although genetic profiling indicates that IPF, Non Specific Interstitial Pneumonia (NSIP), and chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) are distinctly different diseases, in every day practice these diseases can be difficult to tell apart. Furthermore, treatment of these diseases is notoriously difficult. Serum biomarkers reflect our understanding of the underlying pathogenesis and potentially fulfill a role in establishing a diagnosis, prognosis and therapy. While no single biomarker is currently able to accurately predict the presence or absence of an IIP, a composite of several markers holds promise for the future. Several biomarkers, such as KL-6, surfactant proteins and circulating fibrocytes, appear to contribute to our insight into disease progression and prognosis. It is however uncertain whether these markers give us additional information to common diagnostic tests and their value has as yet to be validated for every day practice. Fortunately, the potential of biomarkers is increasingly recognized and biomarker data are prospectively gathered in current placebo-controlled therapeutic trials.
  AIM: To evaluate the ability of newly identified clinical factors to predict prognosis and survival in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and non-specific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP). METHODS: Seventy-eight patients referred to the University of Genoa and the Regional Hospital of Aosta between January 1995 and December 2006 were evaluated prospectively. Fifty-nine patients were diagnosed with IPF and 19 with NSIP on the basis of surgical lung biopsy specimens. Gender, age at diagnosis, smoking, New York Heart Association class (NYHA), systolic pulmonary artery pressure (sPAP), Octreoscan uptake index (UI), and therapy were the chosen variables. Primary end-point was survival. RESULTS: With the exception of gender and smoking history, all baseline patient characteristics correlated significantly with the diagnosis (IPF vs. NSIP). Median survival for the entire study group was 52.7 months. Univariate analysis showed poorer survival for the IPF group versus the NSIP group, and survival was significantly lower for older patients (p < 0.001). Multivariate analysis confirmed the negative prognostic effect of age (p < 0.001) on survival with a risk of death for older patients ( > OR =66 years old) being more than 4 times higher than that for younger patients (<58 yr.). NYHA class and pulmonary artery pressure were also significant predictors of survival, and all patients with a sPAP < OR = 35-mm Hg were alive at the end of the follow-up period. There was a good correlation between Octreoscan uptake index and the diagnosis. CONCLUSION: Diagnosis (IPF vs. NSIP), NYHA class, sPAP, and especially age appear to represent important prognostic indicators in the two most prevalent forms of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF and NSIP). Lower Octreoscan uptake values were found in all patients with IPF, suggesting that this test may have a role as a new predictor of survival for differentiating IPF from NSIP.
  IFN-gamma expression increases during the inflammatory response following bleomycin-injury in mice. In addition, IFN-gamma deficiency attenuates lung inflammation and fibrosis. Since IFN-gamma stimulates class II transactivator (CIITA) expression which activates major histocompatibility class (MHC) II and represses collagen expression, it was hypothesized that CIITA mediates IFN-gamma action following bleomycin injury. To test this hypothesis, two CIITA mouse lines, one carrying a mutation of the leucine-rich-region of CIITA (CIITA C-/-) and one with a deletion extending into the GTP-binding-domain (CIITA G-/-) were employed. IFN-gamma treatment of lung cells isolated from both strains of mice induced mutant CIITA expression which did not activate MHC II transcription. Interestingly, collagen expression was similar in both mutant mouse strains and comparable to C57BL/6 (wild type) mice. When mice were exposed to intratracheal bleomycin, both strains of CIITA mutant mice retained body weight and exhibited altered inflammation at 14 days post-bleomycin injury compared to bleomycin-treated wild type mice. However, there was no difference in fibrosis as judged by histology, mRNA, and protein expression of lungs. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) cells from CIITA C-/- and C57BL/6 lungs were examined at 3, 7, and 14 days post-bleomycin injury. CD4 mRNA expression in BAL cells was down-regulated whereas IL-4 and IL-10 expression were up-regulated in CIITA C-/- mice indicating a diminished, skewed Th2 response. The expression of IFN-gamma was the same in all mice tested. Combined, our data suggest that CIITA mutations altered the immune response without affecting fibrosis.
  Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a progressive fibrotic disease of the lung parenchyma, without curative treatment. Gremlin is a bone morphogenic protein (BMP) antagonist, its expression being increased in IPF lungs. It has been implicated in promoting myofibroblast accumulation, likely through inhibited fibroblast apoptosis and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). In the current study we examined the effects of selective adenovirus-mediated overexpression of Gremlin in rat lungs. We show that transient Gremlin overexpression results in activation of alveolar epithelial cells with proliferation and apoptosis, as well as partly reversible lung fibrosis. We found myofibroblasts arranged in fibroblastic foci, together with evidence for EMT. Fibroblast proliferation occurred delayed as compared to epithelial changes. Fibrotic pathology significantly declined after day 14, the reversal being associated with an increase of the epithelial protective element fibroblast growth factor 10 (FGF10). Our data indicate that Gremlin-mediated BMP inhibition results in activation of epithelial cells and transient fibrosis, but also induction of epithelium protective FGF10. A Gremlin-BMP-FGF10 loop may explain these results, and demonstrate that the interaction between different factors are quite complex in fibrotic lung disease. Increased Gremlin expression in human IPF tissue may be an expression of continuing epithelial injury, and Gremlin may be part of activated repair mechanisms.
  OBJECTIVE: /st> To determine serum levels of interleukin 27 (IL-27) in patients with systemic sclerosis (SSc) and relate the results to the clinical features of SSc. METHODS: /st> Serum levels of IL-27 in 91 patients with SSc and the production of IL-27 by isolated monocytes were examined by ELISA. The expression of IL-27 receptor in the skin fibroblasts, B cells and T cells was quantified by real-time PCR. The effect of IL-27 on immunoglobulin G (IgG) production of B cells, IL-17 production of CD4 T cells and proliferation and collagen synthesis of fibroblasts was also analysed. RESULTS: /st> Serum IL-27 levels were raised in patients with SSc compared with healthy controls and correlated positively with the extent of skin and pulmonary fibrosis and immunological abnormalities. IL-27 levels also correlated positively with serum levels of hyaluronan, recently identified as an endogenous ligand for Toll-like receptors. The retrospective longitudinal analysis showed a tendency for serum IL-27 levels to be attenuated during the follow-up period. IL-27 production by cultured monocytes was increased by hyaluronan stimulation. IL-27 receptor expression was upregulated in the affected skin fibroblasts, B cells and CD4 T cells of patients with SSc. Moreover, IL-27 stimulation increased IgG production of B cells, IL-17 production of CD4 T cells and proliferation and collagen synthesis of fibroblasts in patients with SSc compared with those in healthy controls. CONCLUSION: /st> These results suggest that IL-27 and its signalling in B cells, T cells and fibroblasts contributes to disease development in patients with SSc.
  Current evidence suggests that the keratinocyte growth factor (KGF) and the polymorphonuclear leukocyte may play key roles in the development of lung fibrosis. Here we describe the construction, expression, purification, and identification of a novel NIF (neutrophil inhibitory factor)-KGF mutant fusion protein (NKM). The fusion gene was ligated via a flexible octapeptide hinge and expressed as an insoluble protein in Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3). The fusion protein retained the activities of KGF and NIF, as it inhibited both fibroblast proliferation and leukocyte adhesion. Next, the effects of NKM on bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis in mice were examined. The mice were divided into the following four groups: (i) saline group; (ii) bleomycin group (instilled with 5 mg/kg bleomycin intratracheally); (iii) bleomycin plus dexamethasone (Dex) group (Dex was given intraperitoneally (i.p.) at 1 mg/kg/day 2 days prior to bleomycin instillation and daily after bleomycin instillation until the end of the treatment); and (iv) bleomycin plus NKM group (NKM was given i.p. at 2 mg/kg/day using the same protocol as the Dex group). NKM significantly improved the survival rates of mice exposed to bleomycin. The marked morphological changes and increased hydroxyproline levels resulted from the instillation of bleomycin (on Day 17) in the lungs were significantly inhibited by NKM. These results revealed that NKM can attenuate bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis, suggesting that NKM could be used to prevent bleomycin-induced lung damage or other interstitial pulmonary fibrosis.
  INTRODUCTION: Sarcoidosis is a disease of unknown etiology. Little is known of predictive factors of fibrosis. It was suggested that PAI-1, uPA, TGF-beta1, VEGF, IL-8, TNF-alpha influence this process. Aims: To assess airway inflammatory and fibrosis markers in EBC in sarcoidosis and the effect of fiberoptic bronchoscopy (FOB), bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF), transbronchial lung biopsy (TBLB) and bronchial mucosa membrane biopsy on their production in the airways. MATERIAL AND METHODS: The study group consisted of 11 patients (5 women, 6 men; mean age 40 +/- 9 yrs, mean +/- SD) with sarcoidosis stage I-III. PAI-1 (ng/ml), uPA (ng/ml), TGF-beta1 (pg/ml), VEGF (pg/ml), IL-8 (pg/ml), TNF-alpha (pg/ml) levels were measured in BALF and EBC collected before and 48 hours after FOB. Results: No significant changes in EBC levels of VEGF, PAI-1, TGF-beta1, TNF-alpha (respectively: 8.02 +/- 4.97 pg/ml; 1.1 +/- 1.2 ng/ml; 2909.7 +/- 206.6 pg/ml; 10.7 +/- 19.9 pg/ml) after FOB were observed when compared to baseline. In contrast, IL-8 concentration in EBC (pg/ml) decreased after FOB (0.073 +/- 0.13 v. 0.061 +/- 0.1, p = 0.006) and was significantly lower than in BALF (BALF 0.95 +/- 0.62, p < 0.05). Also, mean level of VEGF was higher in BALF than in EBC both pre- and post- FOB (BALF 66.38 +/- 36.95, EBC pre-FOB 6.75 +/- 3.67 and EBC post-FOB 8.02 +/- 4.97). Significant relationship between TNF-alpha in post-FOB EBC and BALF was also shown (b = 0.63, p = 0.04). CONCLUSIONS: FOB does not significantly affect levels of airway inflammation and fibrosis markers present in EBC before and after FOB; they were also comparable to the concentrations marked by BALF. The lack of correlation between markers levels in EBC and BALF indicates that these methods are not equivalent. Due to repeatibility, and less invasive, simple method of EBC test it seems reasonable to continue the research on the larger number of patients.
  Microvascular damage and dysfunction represent the earliest morphological and functional markers of systemic sclerosis (SSc), a progressive connective tissue disease characterized by vascular abnormalities and diffuse fibrosis in the skin and internal organs. These early microvascular changes are clinically mirrored by Raynaud phenomenon, which can be primary (idiopathic) or secondary to several different conditions including SSc. Morphological and functional assessment of the cutaneous microvasculature have crucial implications for diagnosis, prognosis and therapy in SSc and secondary Raynaud phenomenon. Most importantly, imaging with nailfold videocapillaroscopy (NVC) enables the early differentiation between primary and secondary Raynaud phenomenon by identifying morphological patterns specific to various stages of SSc ('early', 'active' and 'late' patterns); the inclusion of these NVC patterns could increase the sensitivity of classification criteria for SSc. Findings on NVC are also markers of SSc severity and progression, as reduced capillary density has been associated with a high risk of developing digital skin ulcers and pulmonary arterial hypertension. Laser Doppler imaging and thermal imaging demonstrate the dysfunctional cutaneous blood flow in response to cold stimuli. Therapies targeting underlying vascular disease in SSc have been successfully designed to improve the symptoms of Raynaud phenomenon and to reduce ischemic injury to involved organs, and NVC patterns have been found to improve following targeted therapy; however, treatment of later fibrosis remains a challenge.
  Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) infection can cause the development of severe end-stage lung disease characterized by acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and pulmonary fibrosis. The mechanisms by which pulmonary lesions and fibrosis are generated during SARS-CoV infection are not known. Using high-throughput mRNA profiling, we examined the transcriptional response of wild-type (WT), type I interferon receptor knockout (IFNAR1-/-), and STAT1 knockout (STAT1-/-) mice infected with a recombinant mouse-adapted SARS-CoV (rMA15) to better understand the contribution of specific gene expression changes to disease progression. Despite a deletion of the type I interferon receptor, strong expression of interferon-stimulated genes was observed in the lungs of IFNAR1-/- mice, contributing to clearance of the virus. In contrast, STAT1-/- mice exhibited a defect in the expression of interferon-stimulated genes and were unable to clear the infection, resulting in a lethal outcome. STAT1-/- mice exhibited dysregulation of T-cell and macrophage differentiation, leading to a TH2-biased immune response and the development of alternatively activated macrophages that mediate a profibrotic environment within the lung. We propose that a combination of impaired viral clearance and T-cell/macrophage dysregulation causes the formation of prefibrotic lesions in the lungs of rMA15-infected STAT1-/- mice.
  Objectives. SSc is a systemic CTD characterized by fibrosis in skin and internal organs. Interstitial lung disease is a frequent complication with fibrosis in the lung parenchyma. The fibrotic process is believed to be influenced by leukotrienes (LTs) and also by oxidative stress. The aim of this study was to investigate the amount of LTs and 8-isoprostane, a marker of oxidative stress, in exhaled breath condensate (EBC) from SSc patients. Methods. Twenty-two SSc patients with median disease duration of 2.1 years were investigated. Fifteen patients had lcSSc, four patients had dcSSc and three patients only fulfilled criteria for limited SSc. Sixteen healthy controls were enrolled. Cysteinyl-LTs (CysLTs), LTB(4) and 8-isoprostane were measured in EBC with EIA and related to the radiologic extent of pulmonary fibrosis. Results. Compared with controls, SSc patients displayed higher median (interquartile range) CysLT [6.1 (5.3-6.8) vs 4.9 (3.7-6.3) pg/ml; P = 0.040], 8-isoprostane [0.23 (0.20-0.46) vs 0.19 (0.12-0.20) pg/ml; P = 0.0020], but similar levels of LTB(4) [0.70 (0.50-0.83) vs 0.60 (0.42-0.70) pg/ml]. CysLT correlated to LTB(4), while 8-isoprostane did not correlate to any of the LTs. None of the biomarkers measured in EBC correlated to radiologic findings. Conclusion. Increased levels of CysLT and 8-isoprostane in EBC from patients with SSc reflect the inflammatory pattern involving LTs as well as oxidative stress. These findings may indicate a possible non-invasive assessment of pulmonary involvement in SSc with a potential value for assessment of disease progress and therapy evaluation.
  Sclerosing rhabdomyosarcoma (SRMS) is an infrequent variant of rhabdomyosarcoma characterized by extensive intercellular hyaline fibrosis. We report the case of a 37 year-old male with a 9 x 6 cm SRMS on the right elbow. Histologically, the tumor showed an abundant extracellular hyaline matrix with extratumoral vascular emboli and microscopic foci of fusocellular embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (FRMS) separated by a fibrotic band from the sclerosing areas. One year later the patient presented with a right intratesticular tumor of 1.2 x 0.8 cm, which was reported as pure FRMS. Immunohistochemically, SRMS was positive only for MyoD1 and Vimentin and negative for Myogenin and Desmin. Both the elbow emboli with the extratumoral foci of FRMS and the intratesticular tumor were positive for Myogenin, MyoD1, Vimentin and Desmin. Using fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH), the SRMS and the FRMS tumor cells of the elbow and the FRMS tumor cells of the testis were found to be negative for FOXO1A translocation in chromosome 13. PCR chimeric transcriptional products PAX3-FKHR and PAX7-FKHR were not found. Six months following testicular resection, the patient died of multiple metastases in the mediastinum, lung and right thigh.
  The aim of this comparative study was to investigate the development of clinical signs and accompanying haematological, coproscopic and pathological findings as a basis for the monitoring of health condition of Angiostrongylus vasorum infected dogs. Six beagles were orally inoculated with 50 (n = 3) or 500 (n = 3) A. vasorum third stage larvae (L3) obtained from experimentally infected Biomphalaria glabrata snails. Two dogs were treated with moxidectin/imidacloprid spot-on solution and two further dogs with an oral experimental compound 92 days post infection (dpi), and were necropsied 166 dpi. Two untreated control dogs were necropsied 97 dpi. Prepatency was 47-49 days. Dogs inoculated with 500 L3 exhibited earlier (from 42 dpi) and more severe respiratory signs. Clinical signs resolved 12 days after treatment and larval excretion stopped within 20 days in all four treated dogs. Upon necropsy, 10 and 170 adult worms were recovered from the untreated dogs inoculated with 50 and 500 L3, respectively. Adult worms were also found in two treated dogs, in the absence of L1 or eggs. Despite heavy A. vasorum infection load and severe pulmonary changes including vascular thrombosis, only mild haematological changes were observed. Eosinophilia was absent but the presence of plasma cells was observed. Neutrophilic leucocytes showed a transient increase but only after treatment. Signs for coagulopathies were slight; nevertheless coagulation parameters were inoculation dose dependent. Ten weeks after treatment pulmonary fibrosis was still present. Infections starting from 50 L3 of A. vasorum had a massive impact on lung tissues and therefore on the health of affected dogs, particularly after prepatency, although only mild haematological abnormalities were evident.
  Bronchiectasis is defined as an abnormal persistent bronchial dilatation usually associated with inflammation in the bronchial tree and lung parenchyma. The disease remains a common cause of significant morbidity and mortality, especially when associated with hereditary disorders such as cystic fibrosis, ciliary dyskinesia, and immunodeficiency states. Computed tomography is now the diagnostic modality of choice and may also contribute to clinical management, suggesting some etiologic causes. We highlight developments in classification, physiopathology and radiology of this debilitating disease.
  BACKGROUND: Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) plays a well-recognised pathogenic role in cystic fibrosis (CF). AIMS: To evaluate the prevalence and incidence of colonisation by MRSA, clinical impact of MRSA colonisation (year after first MRSA isolation), risk factors and pattern of antimicrobial resistance. Methods: Retrospective review of paediatric CF patients colonised with MRSA followed-up at the CF Unit of Hospital de Santa Maria 2003-2007. RESULTS: Twelve of the 60 patients followed-up during this period were MRSA-positive at some time (chronic colonisation in 3 patients). Mean age at acquisition was 9 years 10 months and mean time interval between CF diagnosis and MRSA acquisition 5 years 7 months. An important rise in MRSA colonisation prevalence and incidence was observed, with the highest rate seen in 2007 (prevalence 14.3% and incidence 8.9%). Four patients had received anti-staphylococcal prophylaxis with flucloxacillin. An increase in the total number of in-patient days was observed in four patients (two with chronic colonisation). Deterioration in lung function was seen in five patients (including the three patients with chronic colonisation). Only one patient had a decrease in body mass index percentile. Resistance to clindamycin and rifampin was the most frequently seen. CONCLUSIONS: This study revealed significant clinical deterioration in patients with chronic colonisation by MRSA, reinforcing the importance of effective and timely decolonisation strategies.
  Accidental exposure by inhalation to alpha-emitting particles from mixed oxide (MOX: uranium and plutonium oxide) fuels is a potential long-term health risk to workers in nuclear fuel fabrication plants. For MOX fuels, the risk of lung cancer development may be different from that assigned to individual components (plutonium, uranium) given different physico-chemical characteristics. The objective of this study was to investigate late effects in rat lungs following inhalation of MOX aerosols of similar particle size containing 2.5 or 7.1% plutonium. Conscious rats were exposed to MOX aerosols and kept for their entire lifespan. Different initial lung burdens (ILBs) were obtained using different amounts of MOX. Lung total alpha activity was determined by external counting and at autopsy for total lung dose calculation. Fixed lung tissue was used for anatomopathological, autoradiographical, and immunohistochemical analyses. Inhalation of MOX at ILBs ranging from 1-20 kBq resulted in lung pathologies (90% of rats) including fibrosis (70%) and malignant lung tumors (45%). High ILBs (4-20 kBq) resulted in reduced survival time (N = 102; p < 0.05) frequently associated with lung fibrosis. Malignant tumor incidence increased linearly with dose (up to 60 Gy) with a risk of 1-1.6% Gy for MOX, similar to results for industrial plutonium oxide alone (1.9% Gy). Staining with antibodies against Surfactant Protein-C, Thyroid Transcription Factor-1, or Oct-4 showed differential labeling of tumor types. In conclusion, late effects following MOX inhalation result in similar risk for development of lung tumors as compared with industrial plutonium oxide.
  Background: Exhaled breath condensate (EBC) has been used for diagnosing and monitoring respiratory disorders. For clinical purposes the assessment of easy-to-obtain nonspecific markers seems particularly interesting. Objectives: As these measures are related to each other, our objective was to extract the independent information in global EBC markers across a range of respiratory disorders. Methods: EBC was collected from patients with asthma (n = 18), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (n = 17), and cystic fibrosis (n = 46), as well as from lung transplant (LTX) recipients (n = 14) and healthy controls (n = 26). Samples were assessed for electrical conductivity, ammonia, pH, and nitrite/nitrate. pH was measured after both deaeration with argon and CO(2) standardization. Additionally, the fraction of exhaled nitric oxide (FE(NO)) was assessed. Factor analysis was applied to identify major factors concerning these measures. Results: Three independent factors were detected; the first comprised conductivity, ammonia, and pH, especially when standardized using CO(2), the second nitrite/nitrate, and the third FE(NO). Conductivity and ammonia were highly correlated (r = 0.968; p < 0.001). FE(NO) provided independent information mainly in asthma. The nonspecific EBC markers showed considerable overlap between patient groups and healthy subjects. However, conductivity, ammonia, pH standardized for CO(2) and nitrite/nitrate were increased in LTX recipients compared to healthy controls (p < 0.05 each). Conclusions: A panel of nonspecific easy-to-obtain exhaled breath markers could be reduced to 3 independent factors. The information content of conductivity, ammonia, and pH after CO(2) equilibration appeared to be similar, while FE(NO) was independent. The increased levels of these biomarkers in LTX might indicate a potential for their use in these patients.
  The small airways of the human lung undergo pathological changes in pulmonary disorders, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), asthma, bronchiolitis obliterans and cystic fibrosis. These clinical problems impose huge personal and societal healthcare burdens. The changes, termed 'pathological airway remodeling', affect the epithelium, the underlying mesenchyme and the reciprocal trophic interactions that occur between these tissues. Most of the normal human airway is lined by a pseudostratified epithelium of ciliated cells, secretory cells and 6-30% basal cells, the proportion of which varies along the proximal-distal axis. Epithelial abnormalities range from hypoplasia (failure to differentiate) to basal- and goblet-cell hyperplasia, squamous- and goblet-cell metaplasia, dysplasia and malignant transformation. Mesenchymal alterations include thickening of the basal lamina, smooth muscle hyperplasia, fibrosis and inflammatory cell accumulation. Paradoxically, given the prevalence and importance of airway remodeling in lung disease, its etiology is poorly understood. This is due, in part, to a lack of basic knowledge of the mechanisms that regulate the differentiation, maintenance and repair of the airway epithelium. Specifically, little is known about the proliferation and differentiation of basal cells, a multipotent stem cell population of the pseudostratified airway epithelium. This Perspective summarizes what we know, and what we need to know, about airway basal cells to evaluate their contributions to normal and abnormal airway remodeling. We contend that exploiting well-described model systems using both human airway epithelial cells and the pseudostratified epithelium of the genetically tractable mouse trachea will enable crucial discoveries regarding the pathogenesis of airway disease.
  Respiratory disease is the main cause of morbidity and mortality in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). In particular, patients suffer from chronic infection due to biofilm formation by opportunistic Pseudomonas aeruginosa (32). Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop alternative ways to treat biofilm-associated clinical infections. The aim of this study was to compare the antimicrobial effects in vitro of the combinations tobramycin-clarithromycin and tobramycin-azithromycin against five P. aeruginosa biofilms and to establish the most effective combination. We performed a kinetic study over a period of 28 days of a twice-daily coadministration of the combinations tobramycin-clarithromycin and tobramycin-azithromycin on 12-day-old, mature P. aeruginosa biofilms formed on microplate pegs for 4 clinical isolates and one laboratory strain (PAO1) to simulate the treatment of CF patients with tobramycin inhalation solution (TOBI) through aerosolization. A synergy between tobramycin and clarithromycin was recorded for 3/5 biofilms, with a bacterial decrease of more than 5 log. Conversely, we found an antagonistic activity when 4 μg/ml tobramycin was administered with azithromycin at 2 μg/ml for P. aeruginosa PAO1 and with azithromycin at 2, 20, 50, 100, and 200 μg/ml for P. aeruginosa PYO1. Treatment with tobramycin at 4 μg/ml combined with clarithromycin at 200 μg/ml eradicated all five biofilms, while tobramycin-azithromycin at the same concentrations eradicated only three biofilms. Results of this study suggest that local administration of tobramycin and clarithromycin into the respiratory tract represents a better strategy than the combination tobramycin-azithromycin for the treatment of P. aeruginosa-associated pulmonary infections.
  A hallmark of airways in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) is highly refractory, chronic infections by several opportunistic bacterial pathogens. A recent study demonstrated that acidified sodium nitrite (A-NO(2)(-)) killed the highly refractory mucoid form of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, a pathogen that significantly compromises lung function in CF patients (S. S. Yoon et al., J. Clin. Invest. 116:436-446, 2006). Therefore, the microbicidal activity of A-NO(2)(-) (pH 6.5) against the following three major CF pathogens was assessed: P. aeruginosa (a mucoid, mucA22 mutant and a sequenced nonmucoid strain, PAO1), Staphylococcus aureus USA300 (methicillin resistant), and Burkholderia cepacia, a notoriously antibiotic-resistant organism. Under planktonic, anaerobic conditions, growth of all strains except for P. aeruginosa PAO1 was inhibited by 7.24 mM (512 μg ml(-1) NO(2)(-)). B. cepacia was particularly sensitive to low concentrations of A-NO(2)(-) (1.81 mM) under planktonic conditions. In antibiotic-resistant communities known as biofilms, which are reminiscent of end-stage CF airway disease, A-NO(2)(-) killed mucoid P. aeruginosa, S. aureus, and B. cepacia; 1 to 2 logs of cells were killed after a 2-day incubation with a single dose of ∼15 mM A-NO(2)(-). Animal toxicology and phase I human trials indicate that these bactericidal levels of A-NO(2)(-) can be easily attained by aerosolization. Thus, in summary, we demonstrate that A-NO(2)(-) is very effective at killing these important CF pathogens and could be effective in other infectious settings, particularly under anaerobic conditions where bacterial defenses against the reduction product of A-NO(2)(-), nitric oxide (NO), are dramatically reduced.
  Biological responses of multi-wall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) were assessed after a single intratracheal instillation in rats. The diameter and median length of the MWCNTs used in this study were approximately 60 nm and 1.5 μm, respectively. Groups of male Sprague-Dawley rats were intratracheally instilled with 0.04, 0.2, or 1 mg/kg of the individually dispersed MWCNT suspension. After instillation, the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid was assessed for inflammatory cells and markers, and the lung, liver, kidney, spleen, and cerebrum were histopathologically evaluated at 3-day, 1-week, 1-month, 3-month, and 6-month post-exposure. Transient pulmonary inflammatory responses were observed only in the lungs of the group of rats exposed to 1 mg/kg of MWCNTs. Morphology of the instilled MWCNTs in the lungs of rats was assessed using light microscopy and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Light microscopy examination revealed that MWCNTs deposited in the lungs of the rats were typically phagocytosed by the alveolar macrophages and these macrophages were consequently accumulated in the alveoli until 6-month post-exposure. The 400 TEM images obtained showed that all MWCNTs were located in the alveolar macrophages or macrophages in the interstitial tissues, and MWCNTs were not located in the cells of the interstitial tissues. There was no evidence of chronic inflammation, such as angiogenesis or fibrosis, induced by MWCNT instillation. These results suggest that MWCNTs were being processed and cleared by alveolar macrophages.
  BACKGROUND: We assessed the relationship between physiologic parameters, computed tomography patterns, 6 minute walk distance (6MWD) and the distance-saturation product [DSP; defined as the product of the 6MWD and the lowest oxygen saturation during the 6 minute walk test (6MWT)]. In addition, we investigated factors affecting 6MWD in patients with pulmonary sarcoidosis. METHODS: We performed a retrospective study of patient demographics, treatment, pulmonary function, 6MWT, echocardiography and computed tomography results. RESULTS: Fifty nine patients were included in this study. Their mean+standard deviation age was 47.5 years + 12.5 years, and 42 (71.2%) were female. Mean pulmonary function parameters for forced vital capacity (FVC), forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) and total lung capacity (TLC) results, as percentages of predicted values, were 77.6 +/- 22.2, 77.1 +/- 22.8 and 78.7 +/- 16.1, respectively. Comparison of the DSP with distance walked revealed a significant correlation with factors underlying reduced 6MWD, including gender, pulmonary function indices, partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2), and Borg dyspnea score. Other factors were significantly associated with DSP but not distance; these included lung fibrosis (p = 0.02), pulmonary hypertension (p = 0.01) and systemic therapy (p = 0.04). Backward elimination stepwise multiple regression analysis revealed that gender, and FEV1 were independent predictors of 6MWD, but FEV1 was more strongly related when DSP applied [DSP, R2 = 0.53, p = 0.02; distance, R2 = 0.45, p < 0.0001]. CONCLUSION: Our findings reveal that, compared to 6MWD alone, the DSP is correlated with a greater number of factors associated with reduced 6MWT performance. Therefore, the DSP may be a useful indicator of functional status in patients with sarcoidosis. Additional large-scale studies are warranted to validate our findings.
  Background Peritoneal fibrosis manifests clinically as membrane failure or encapsulating peritoneal sclerosis (EPS). There are no clinical or biochemical tests to determine the rate of progression of peritoneal fibrosis. CCL18/pulmonary and activation-regulated chemokine (PARC) is profibrotic and stimulates collagen production independent of the effect of transforming growth factor beta. This has not been studied in peritoneal dialysis (PD) patients. Materials and methods We have prospectively studied 106 patients, free from infection/recent peritonitis. A high concentration of CCL18 was discovered by multiplex antibody arrays and quantified by ELISA. Serum and dialysate levels were examined for their prognostic values. Results By multiple regression analysis, dialysate CCL18 (6.76 +/- 0.66 mug 4 h(-1)) correlated with increasing membrane transport status (TS) (P < 0.0001) and total glucose exposure/24 h (P = 0.033). Serum CCL18 correlated with high TS (P = 0.0001) and duration of PD (P = 0.001). After 12 months of follow-up, 57 patients remained on PD while 12 patients were transferred to haemodialysis (HD) and seven developed EPS. Patients who subsequently developed EPS had higher baseline dialysate CCL18 (11.5 +/- 3.6 mug 4 h(-1) vs. 5.6 +/- 0.82 mug 4 h(-1), P = 0.03) and serum CCL18 (156.9 +/- 12.8 ng mL(-1) vs. 124.8 +/- 12.2 ng mL(-1), P = 0.02) compared with the stable PD group. Conclusion This is the first report of high levels of CCL18 in the spent dialysate and serum from long-term PD patients. These levels correlated with dysfunction of peritoneal membrane transport status, therefore following CCL18 in a longitudinal study may be of interest.
  A defective mucociliary clearance facilitates colonization with bacteria and fungal spores in cystic fibrosis patients. Yeasts and molds are cultured from the cystic fibrosis respiratory tract and often their clinical relevance is unknown. Candida spp. are the most commonly isolated yeasts, whereas Aspergillus spp., Scedosporium apiospermum, as well as Exophiala dermatitidis in some countries, are the most frequent molds recovered from respiratory specimens. Molecular biotyping studies have revealed that some fungal genotypes are capable of chronically colonizing the airways. Persistent Aspergillus fumigatus infection is associated with an increased risk of pulmonary exacerbations requiring hospitalization. The prevalence of non-Aspergillus molds may be underestimated due to overgrowth of Pseudomonas and Aspergillus spp. on routine media. Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis is usually treated by oral steroids and an antifungal azole drug. Interactions with the co-medication have to be considered. A small number of antifungal pharmacokinetic studies indicate a high inter-subject variability for itraconazole, voriconazole and posaconazole, and therefore therapeutic drug monitoring is recommended.
  The pathological response and translocation of a commercial chrysotile product similar to that which was used through the mid-1970s in a joint compound intended for sealing the interface between adjacent wall boards was evaluated in comparison to amosite asbestos. This study was unique in that it presents a combined real-world exposure and was the first study to investigate whether there were differences between chrysotile and amosite asbestos fibers in time course, size distribution, and pathological response in the pleural cavity. Rats were exposed by inhalation 6 h/day for 5 days to either sanded joint compound consisting of both chrysotile fibers and sanded joint compound particles (CSP) or amosite asbestos. Subgroups were examined through 1-year postexposure. No pathological response was observed at any time point in the CSP-exposure group. The long chrysotile fibers (L > 20 microm) cleared rapidly (T(1/2) of 4.5 days) and were not observed in the pleural cavity. In contrast, a rapid inflammatory response occurred in the lung following exposure to amosite resulting in Wagner grade 4 interstitial fibrosis within 28 days. Long amosite fibers had a T(1/2) > 1000 days and were observed in the pleural cavity within 7 days postexposure. By 90 days the long amosite fibers were associated with a marked inflammatory response on the parietal pleural. This study provides support that CSP following inhalation would not initiate an inflammatory response in the lung, and that the chrysotile fibers present do not migrate to, or cause an inflammatory response in the pleural cavity, the site of mesothelioma formation.
  INTRODUCTION: In the pathogenesis of diffuse parenchymal lung diseases (DPLDs), growth factors, including transforming growth factor beta1 (TGF-beta1), are responsible for cell proliferation, apoptosis, chemotaxis, and angiogenesis, and also for the production and secretion of some components of the extracellular matrix. OBJECTIVES: The aim of the study was to evaluate correlations in DPLDs between TGF-beta1 levels in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid and high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) score. PATIENTS AND METHODS: The study was performed in 31 DPLD patients in whom a selection of lung segments with high and low intensity of abnormalities was estimated by HRCT score. All patients underwent BAL with TGF-beta1 measured by an enzyme immunoassay in BAL fluid and video-assisted thoracic surgery lung biopsy from both selected segments. RESULTS: All 31 patients were diagnosed, and based on histopathology, they were classified into 2 groups: idiopathic interstitial pneumonia (usual interstitial pneumonia - 12, nonspecific inter stitial pneumonia - 2, cryptogenic organizing pneumonia - 2, and desquamative interstitial pneumonia - 1) and granulomatous disease (sarcoidosis - 7, extrinsic allergic alveolitis - 5, and histiocytosis X - 2). The final analysis was performed in 28 patients who showed nonhomogenous distribution on HRCT. TGF-beta1 levels in BAL fluid were significantly higher in the areas with high intensity of abnormalities assessed by HRCT score (P = 0.018, analysis of variance). These levels were not different between the groups, but a trend towards higher levels in idiopathic inter stitial pneumonia was observed. CONCLUSIONS: The results confirm that TGF-beta1 may be a good but not specific marker of fibrosis in DPLDs. A significant positive correlation between TGF-beta1 levels in BAL fluid and the HRCT score was observed.
  PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The term 'pulmonary fibrosis' encompasses a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by replacement of the lung parenchyma with scar tissue. Despite many years of research, its pathogenesis remains obscure and a cure remains elusive. The bulk of human data in this area derive from patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Pulmonary fibrosis has also emerged as a leading cause of mortality in patients with systemic sclerosis. Because of a lack of effective therapy, better understanding of the mechanism(s) driving this disease has the potential to impact the proximate cause of death in most patients with scleroderma. RECENT FINDINGS: Animal modeling and translational human studies lend insight into the pathogenesis of lung fibrosis. Recent developments include the role of epithelial cell injury, endoplasmic reticulum stress and Wnt signaling, the contributions of alternatively activated macrophages and efferocytosis, the extra-mesenchymal origin of fibroblasts including epithelial-mesenchymal transition and fibrocytes, a possible association with senescence and aging, and the emerging role of lymphocytes in the fibrotic response. SUMMARY: Novel investigations defining the mechanism of epithelial cell injury, alternative macrophage activation and efferocytosis, alternate sources of fibroblasts, cellular senescence, and lymphocyte function may lend new insight into the pathogenesis of scleroderma-related pulmonary fibrosis.
  PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Progressive organ fibrosis and pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) are the leading causes of death in patients with systemic sclerosis (SSc). However, the pathogenesis and the link between these two processes remain obscure. A better understanding of these events is needed in order to facilitate the discovery and development of effective therapies for SSc. RECENT FINDINGS: Recent reports provide evidence that the orphan receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPARγ), better known for its pivotal role in metabolism, has potent effects on inflammation, fibrogenesis and vascular remodeling and is important in the pathogenesis of fibrosis and PAH, and as a potential therapeutic target in SSc. The studies discussed in this review indicate that ligands of PPARγ potently modulate connective tissue turnover and suggest that aberrant expression or function of PPARγ is associated with, and very likely contributes to, the progression of pathological fibrosis and vascular remodeling. These observations are of particularly relevance because FDA-approved drugs of the thiazolidinedione class currently used for the treatment of obesity-associated type 2 diabetes activate PPARγ signaling. Moreover, novel PPARγ ligands with selective activity are under development or in clinical trials for inflammatory diseases, asthma, Alzheimer disease and cancer. SUMMARY: Drugs targeting the PPARγ pathway might be effective for the control of fibrosis as well as pathological vascular remodeling underlying PAH and, therefore, might have a therapeutic potential in SSc. A greater understanding of the mechanisms underlying the antifibrogenic and vascular remodeling activities of PPARγ ligands will be necessary in order to advance these drugs into clinical use.
  The histopathology of idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis (IPF) includes the presence of myofibroblasts within so called fibroblastic foci, and studies suggest lung myofibroblasts may be derived from epithelial cells through epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). TGF-beta1 is expressed and/or activated in fibrogenesis and induces EMT in lung epithelial cells in a dose dependent manner. A higher occurrence of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) has been reported in the lung tissue of IPF patients. EBV expresses latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) during the latent phase of infection and may play a role in the pathogenesis of pulmonary fibrosis inasmuch as LMP-1 may act as a constitutively active TNF-alpha receptor. Our data show a remarkable increase in mesenchymal cell markers along with a concurrent reduction in the expression of epithelial cell markers in lung epithelial cells co-treated with LMP-1 and very low doses of TGF-beta1. This effect was mirrored in lung epithelial cells infected with EBV expressing LMP1 and co-treated with TGF-beta1. LMP1 pro-EMT signaling was identified and occurs primarily through the NF-kappaB pathway and secondarily through the ERK pathway. Activation of the ERK pathway was shown to be critical for aspects of TGF-beta1 induced EMT. LMP1 accentuates the TGF-beta1 activation of ERK. Together these data demonstrate that the presence of EBV-LMP1 in lung epithelial cells synergizes with TGF-beta1 to induce EMT. Our in vitro data may help explain the observation that IPF patients demonstrating positive staining for LMP-1 in lung epithelial cells have a more rapid demise than patients in whom LMP-1 is not detected.
  Chronic lung colonization with Pseudomonas aeruginosa is anticipated in cystic fibrosis (CF). Abnormal terminal glycosylation has been implicated as a candidate for this condition. We previously reported a down-regulation of mannose-6-phosphate isomerase (MPI) for core N-glycan production in the CFTR defective human cell line (IB3). Currently, we revealed a 40% decrease in N-glycosylation of IB3 cells compared to CFTR corrected human cell line (S9) along with a 3-fold lower surface attachment of P. aeruginosa strain PAO1. There was a 2-fold increase in intra-cellular bacteria in S9 cells compared to IB3 cells. Following a 4 hr clearance period, intra-cellular bacteria in IB3 cells increased 2-fold. Comparatively, a 2-fold decrease in intra-cellular bacteria occurred in S9 cells. Gene augmentation in IB3 cells with hMPI or hCFTR reversed these IB3 deficiencies. Mannose-6-phosphate can be produced from external mannose independent of MPI, and correction in the IB3 clearance deficiencies was observed when cultured in mannose rich medium. An in vivo model for P. aeruginosa colonization in the upper airways revealed an increased bacterial burden in the trachea and oropharynx of non-therapeutic CF mice compared to mice treated either with an intra-tracheal delivery of adeno-associated viral vector (AAV5) expressing murine MPI or a hyper-mannose water diet. Finally, a modest lung inflammatory response was observed in CF mice and was partially corrected by both treatments. Augmenting N-glycosylation to attenuate colonization of P. aeruginosa in CF airways reveals a new therapeutic avenue for a hallmark disease condition in CF.
  This study tests the hypothesis that bone marrow-derived mononuclear cell (BMDMC) therapy may reduce lung inflammation and fibrosis leading to an improvement in respiratory mechanics in a murine model of silicosis. Fifty-two female C57BL/6 mice were randomly assigned into four groups. In SIL group, silica suspension (SiO2; 20 mg/50 mul in saline) was intratracheally (i.t.) instilled and in C animals, saline (50 mul i.t.) was administered. At one hour, C and SIL groups were further randomized receiving BMDMC (2x10(6), intravenously) (C-Cell and SIL-Cell) or saline (50 mul, i.v.) (C and SIL). BMDMC were obtained from male donor mice. At day 15, lung mechanics, histology, the presence of Y chromosome, interleukin (IL)-1betaIL-1alpha, interleukin-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1RN), interleukin-1 receptor type 1 (IL-1R1), transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta and caspase-3 mRNA expressions in lung tissue were analysed. In SIL-Cell group, the fraction area of granuloma, the number of macrophages, and collagen fibre content were reduced yielding improved lung mechanics. The presence of male donor cells in lung tissue was not confirmed using detection of Y chromosome DNA. Nevertheless, caspase-3, IL-1betaIL-1alpha, IL-1RN, and TGF-beta mRNA expression diminished after cell therapy. In conclusion, BMDMC acted on inflammatory and fibrogenic processes improving lung function through paracrine effects.
  Outcome measures to assess therapeutic interventions in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients with mild lung disease are lacking. Our aim was to determine if the Lung Clearance Index (LCI) can detect a treatment response to dornase alfa in paediatric CF patients with normal spirometry. CF patients between 6 and 18 years of age with FEV1% >/=80% predicted were eligible. In a crossover design, 17 patients received 4 weeks of dornase alfa and placebo in a randomized sequence separated by a 4-weekwashout period. The primary endpoint was the change in LCI from dornase alfa versus placebo. A mixed model approach incorporating period-dependent baselines was used. This trial was registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00557089. The mean age+/-SD was 10.32+/-3.35 years. Dornase alfa improved LCI versus placebo (0.90+/-1.44, p=0.022). A significant improvement in LCI occurred in seven of the seventeen subjects. Small airways flows as measured by forced expiratory flow at 25-75% expired volume (FEF25-75) measured by percent predicted and z-scores also improved in subjects on dornase alfa (6.1%+/-10.34, p=0.03; and 0.28 z-score+/-0.46, p=0.03). Dornase alfa significantly improved LCI. Therefore the LCI may be a suitable tool to assess early intervention strategies in this patient population.
  Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Pa) is the predominant organism infecting the airways of patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). This organism has an armamentarium of survival mechanisms that allows it to survive in the CF airway. Since colonization and chronic infection with Pa is associated with poorer lung function and increased morbidity and mortality, therapies that can prevent infection could significantly improve the lives of patients with CF. Numerous studies have examined the effects of treatment on the eradication of Pa as a means to ameliorate disease. This article outlines the pathophysiology and clinical implication of Pa acquisition, and reviews the existing treatment regimens aimed at early eradication of Pa in patients with CF.
  In the last 45 years, lung transplantation has evolved from its status as a rare extreme form of surgical therapy for the treatment of advanced lung diseases to an accepted therapeutic option for select patients. Although pulmonary fibrosis and pulmonary vascular diseases are important indications for lung transplantation, only a small percentage of transplants are performed in patients with collagen vascular diseases. The reasons for this low number are multifactorial. This article reviews issues relevant to all lung transplant candidates and recipients as well as those specific to patients with autoimmune diseases.
  Ankylosing spondylitis, a chronic multisystem inflammatory disorder, can present with articular and extra-articular features. It can affect the tracheobronchial tree and the lung parenchyma, and respiratory complications include chest wall restriction, apical fibrobullous disease with or without secondary pulmonary superinfection, spontaneous pneumothorax, and obstructive sleep apnea. Ankylosing spondylitis is a common cause of pulmonary apical fibrocystic disease; early involvement may be unilateral or asymmetrical, but most cases eventually consist of bilateral apical fibrobullous lesions, many of which are progressive with coalescence of the nodules, formation of cysts and cavities, fibrosis, and bronchiectasis. Mycobacterial or fungal superinfection of the upper lobe cysts and cavities occurs commonly. Aspergillus fumigatus is the most common pathogen isolated, followed by various species of mycobacteria. Prognosis of patients with fibrobullous apical lesions is mainly determined by the presence, extent, and severity of superinfection. Pulmonary function test results are nonspecific and generally parallel the severity of parenchymal involvement. A restrictive ventilatory impairment can develop in patients with ankylosing spondylitis because of either fusion of the costovertebral joints and ankylosis of the thoracic spine or anterior chest wall involvement. Chest radiographic findings may mirror the severity of clinical involvement. Pulmonary parenchymal disease is typically progressive, and cyst formation, cavitation, and fibrosis are seen in advanced cases. No treatment has been shown to alter the clinical course of apical fibrobullous disease. Although several antiinflammatory agents, such as infliximab, etanercept, and adalimumab, are being used to treat ankylosing spondylitis, their effects on pulmonary manifestations are unclear.
  Pulmonary involvement is common in patients with connective tissue diseases (CTDs), and significantly contributes to morbidity and mortality in this patient population. There are different forms of lung pathology in CTDs, which include primary involvement such as interstitial lung disease or pulmonary hemorrhage, and pulmonary complications resulting from other CTD-related organ involvement including aspiration pneumonia due to muscle weakness or esophageal fibrosis. Moreover, iatrogenic lung disease, such as medication-induced hypersensitivity pneumonitis or opportunistic infections due to immunosuppression, may develop. Appropriate treatment of pulmonary complications in patients with CTDs requires careful diagnostic workup because different forms of lung involvement may overlap, causing similar clinical manifestations and similar radiological or functional impairment. Moreover, in view of the broad variability of clinical course of CTD-related interstitial lung disease, identification of biomarkers helpful in predicting prognosis becomes of key importance. In addition to radiological assessment and functional testing that provide information regarding localization and severity of lung disease, bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) appears helpful in revealing the nature of lung pathology and intensity of lung inflammation through sampling of cells and fluid from the lower respiratory tract. The aim of this article is to critically review available data concerning the evaluation of BAL cytology in different forms of lung disease associated with CTDs.
  The H1N1 pandemic flu is a significant risk factor for both patients with chronic disease who need organ transplantation and transplant recipients. This population needs special care regarding comorbidities and related complications. MB, a 38-year-old Italian cystic fibrosis male patient with lung and pancreatic involvement, was referred to our division in July 2009 for fever-associated arthromyalgia, headache, and rhinitis. Lung transplantation had been performed in September 2005, and he was subsequently treated with immunosuppressive therapy: tacrolimus, everolimus, and prednisolone. In the past, chronic respiratory colonization with Pseudomonas aeruginosa and intermittent infection with Aspergillus flavus, chronic renal failure, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus complicated his clinical history. He started antiviral treatment with oseltamivir despite no travel history and no respiratory symptoms. H1N1 swab was positive. Three days later, the patient was admitted to the hospital for the persistence of fever and the onset of cough. Chest x-ray showed a left lower pneumonia, which was confirmed by computerized tomography. Broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy led to an improvement of the clinical condition. The patient was discharged 8 days later; a control swab was negative. This case report suggests some general considerations regarding solid organ recipients: 1) Flu-related complications require early treatment (both antiviral and antibiotic); 2) active microbiologic surveillance is important to prevent lethal infections (ie, invasive aspergillosis); 3) evaluation of immunosuppressant blood levels is necessary for drug-drug interactions. Active prevention is the best option for decreasing morbidity and mortality in the transplanted patient.
  A comparative study, based on histopathologic findings (inflammation, cellularity, and fibrosis) and immunologic parameters (pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines), was carried out in order to evaluate the effects of itraconazole (ITC) treatment and its starting time in a BALB/c murine model of chronic pulmonary paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM), induced by intranasal inoculation of Paracoccidioides brasiliensis (Pb) conidia. Two different groups of mice were exposed to ITC therapy beginning at the 4th or 8th week after Pb infection, respectively. ITC was administered daily, via gavage, for a period of sixty days. At weeks 0, 4, 8, 12 and 16 the animals were sacrificed and their lungs removed for histology staining with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E), Masson's trichromic and Gomori-Grocott; pulmonary levels of IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma, IL-13 and TGF-beta were also measured by ELISA. The development or absence of the principal pulmonary PCM sequela, lung fibrosis, was directly related to the therapy's starting time. This and other histopathological findings were related to the behavior of cytokine levels.
  Of the idiopathic interstitial pneumonias, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP) have provoked the most debate and discussion. Although the two diseases are distinct entities, diagnosis is not always straightforward and requires a multidisciplinary approach, integrating clinical, radiological and histologic information. Although there is currently no effective treatment for either disease, the importance of differentiating NSIP from IPF lies in the management of the individual patient, with particular focus on outcome and pace of change, and enrollment into novel treatment trials of IPF.
  Although core needle biopsy has been shown to be an accurate means of diagnosing lung malignancies, there is relatively little information in the literature about its utility in diagnosing specific non-malignant conditions. We reviewed the pathologic findings in 159 core needle biopsies showing benign changes in order to determine the types of processes that can be diagnosed by this technique and the factors that influence accuracy and specificity. There were 155 patients ranging in age from 3 to 86 years (mean 58). Nodules or masses were present radiologically in most. They ranged from 0.5 to 8.0 cm (mean 1.65 cm) in size and 80% measured 2.0 cm or less. Twenty percent were spiculated, and positron emission tomography scans were positive in 48 of 56 cases tested (30% of total). Specific diagnoses were established in 122 (77%) of 159 core needle biopsies, while 24 (15%) were nonspecific and 13 (8%) were nonrepresentative. The most common specific diagnoses were necrotizing granulomatous inflammation (45), scar (28), organizing pneumonia (13), and benign neoplasms (11). A mixture of interstitial fibrosis and chronic inflammation (16) was the most common nonspecific diagnosis. A specific diagnosis was significantly more likely in biopsies with 3 or more cores or with a core length of more than 1 cm. Malignancy was diagnosed on a subsequent biopsy in only one case, and the initial biopsy in that case showed non-specific chronic inflammation and fibrosis. Our findings confirm that core needle biopsy is an accurate method of diagnosing benign lung lesions, yielding specific diagnoses in the majority.
  Interstitial lung disease has been reported in cancer patients treated with epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors, erlotinib and gefitinib. Preclinical safety studies with erlotinib did not show any evidence for an induction of injury on intact lungs in rats and dogs. In the present study, we investigated the effects of erlotinib on lung injury induced by intratracheal administration of bleomycin (BLM) in rats. In Experiment 1, we examined the effects of short-term (7- and 21-day) administration of erlotinib (10 mg/kg/day, p.o.; subtoxic dose) on the BLM (0.1 or 0.6 mg/rat)-induced lung injury of slight and moderate severity. In Experiment 2, we examined the effects of long term (up to 63-day) administration of higher-dose (up to 20 mg/kg/day; toxic dose; accompanied with decreased body weight gain and severe skin lesions) erlotinib on the BLM-induced lung injury. In rats receiving erlotinib alone, no lung lesions were noted. In rats receiving BLM alone, diffuse alveolar damage (DAD) and, subsequently, pulmonary fibrosis of slight or moderate severity was observed. The administration of erlotinib to BLM-treated rats showed no exacerbation of lung injuries in indices such as macroscopic findings, lung weights, histopathological scores (lung lesion density and lung fibrosis score), and pulmonary hydroxyproline (HyP) level. These results suggest that erlotinib does not have any exacerbating effects on lung injuries induced by BLM in rats.
  We report the pathological findings of the lung after acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), and pulmonary function tests during five years of follow-up. A 39-year-old woman, treated for acute myelogenous leukemia, developed ARDS. She recovered from ARDS but suffered from pulmonary aspergillosis. Her aspergilloma was removed surgically. Her lung function tests and diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DL(CO)) improved but diffusion impairment remained five years after recovery. Pathological examination of the resected material showed sclerosis in lobular septa and scattered fibrosis in alveolar ducts except for the aspergillosis. These fibrotic changes may be causally associated with her loss of DL(CO).
  BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The outcome of acute exacerbation of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (AE-IPF) is usually very poor, and it has been suggested that mechanical ventilation does not benefit AE-IPF patients. Noninvasive ventilation (NIV) has attracted attention as a means to avoid intubation in acute respiratory failure, including acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). This study describes the outcome of patients with AE-IPF who were treated with NIV. METHODS: Patients included in the study were those who fulfilled the criteria for AE-IPF during the periods between April 1998 and June 2004 at Tosei General Hospital, and in whom NIV was introduced. Clinical data were obtained retrospectively from patient records. RESULTS: This study included 11 patients. The initial NIV settings were continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) mode in 6 patients (mean 10.1+/-2.5 cmH(2)O) and Spontaneous/Timed mode in 5 (mean inspiratory positive airway pressure/expiratory positive airway pressure; 15.0+/-3.3/10.2+/-2.9 cmH(2)O). Five patients avoided intubation and survived more than 3 months after AE-IPF. Six patients who failed NIV died within 3 months. In these 6 patients, 4 required intubation. The other 2 patients, who refused endotracheal intubation, died without intubation. Median survival time and 3-month survivals after acute exacerbation were 30 days, and 45.5%, respectively. CONCLUSION: Considering extremely poor prognosis of AE-IPF, our findings suggest that NIV is a viable option for the respiratory management in AE-IPF, and should be studied in a large, well-controlled trial.

