Over the last decades, evidence has accumulated suggesting that there is a distinct nuclear phosphatidylinositol pathway. One of the best examined nuclear lipid pathways is the hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PI4,5P2) by PLC resulting in activation of nuclear PKC and production of inositol polyphosphates. However, there is a growing number of data that phosphoinositides are not only precursor for soluble inositol phosphates and diacylglycerol, instead they can act as second messengers themselves. They have been implicated to play a role in different important nuclear signaling events such as cell cycle progression, apoptosis, chromatin remodeling, transcriptional regulation and mRNA processing. This review focuses on the role of specifically PI4,5P2 in the nucleus as a second messenger as well as a precursor for PI3,4,5P3, inositol polyphosphates and diacylglycerol.
a-Synuclein is a conserved protein that is a key component in neurodegenerative plaques [1,2]. a-Synuclein binds strongly to phospholipase Cß (PLCß) and promotes Ca2+ release in cells. Here, we show that expression of a-synuclein increases the cellular level of PLCß1 in two neuronal cell lines: PC12 and SK–N–S–SH. The increase in PLCß1 is not accompanied by changes in the level of RNA or in ubiquitination. Instead, we find that a-synuclein protects PLCß1 from trypsin digestion and from degradation by the Ca+ 2 activated protease calpain. Calpain removes the C-terminal region of the enzyme which mediates activation by Gaq. We find that in SK–N–SH cells, a-synuclein reduced degradation of PLCß1 by calpain during Ca2+ signaling allowing the enzyme to remain sensitive to Gaq activation. Taken together, our studies show that a-synuclein protects the integrity of PLCß1 and its ability to be activated by Gaq, which may in turn impact Ca2+ signaling.
Lactate accumulation in the medium and glucose utilization decreased during the induction of in vitro differentiation of mouse erythroleukemia (MEL) and human myeloid leukemia (HL-60) cells. The decrease in lactate accumulation occurred as early as 24 h after inducer treatment was initiated and occurred prior to the decrease in glucose utilization. The decrease in lactate accumulation was greater than that predicted by the decrease in glucose utilization, i.e., the ratio of glucose used glycolytically, as measured by lactate accumulation, to glucose used in other pathways (‘glycolytic ratio’) markedly decreased during differentiation in these cell lines. Differentiation correlated with the abrogation of the high levels of lactate accumulation first described by Warburg as characteristic of some transformed and neoplastic cells. Studies on both parental and differentiation-resistant variant MEL cell lines indicated that the changes in lactate accumulation were not dependent on the changes in glucose utilization and could be dissociated from them. Moreover, the changes in lactate accumulation only occurred in cells able to undergo differentiation-induced terminal cell division. This regulatable expression of lactate accumulation in MEL and HL-60 cells in vitro may make them useful model systems for the elucidation of the molecular mechanisms controlling lactate formation in malignant cells.
Despite the remarkable progress achieved in the treatment of leukemias over the last several years, many problems (multidrug resistance [MDR], cellular heterogeneity, heterogeneous molecular abnormalities, karyotypic instability, and lack of selective action of antineoplastic agents) still remain. The recent progress in tumor molecular biology has revealed that leukemias are likely to arise from disruption of differentiation of early hematopoietic progenitors that fail to give birth to cell lineage restricted phenotypes. Evidence supporting such mechanisms has been derived from studying bone marrow leukemiogenesis and analyzing differentiation of leukemic cell lines in culture that serve as models of erythroleukemic (murine erythroleukemia [MEL] and human leukemia [K562] cells) and myeloid (human promyelocytic leukemia [HL-60] cells) cell maturation. This paper reviews the current concepts of differentiation, the chemical/pharmacological inducing agents developed thus far, and the mechanisms involved in initiation of leukemic cell differentiation. Emphasis was given on commitment and the cell lineage transcriptional factors as key regulators of terminal differentiation as well as on membrane-mediated events and signaling pathways involved in hematopoietic cell differentiation. The developmental program of MEL cells was presented in considerable depth. It is quite remarkable that the erythrocytic maturation of these cells is orchestrated into specific subprograms and gene expression patterns, suggesting that leukemic cell differentiation represents a highly coordinated set of events that lead to irreversible growth arrest and expression of cell lineage restricted phenotypes. In MEL and other leukemic cells, differentiation appears to be accompanied by differentiation-dependent apoptosis (DDA), an event that can be exploited chemotherapeutically. The mechanisms by which the chemical inducers promote differentiation of leukemic cells have been discussed.
In this study, the activity of nuclear phosphatidylinositol-specific phosholipase C (PI-PLC) was investigated in HL-60 cells blocked at G2/M phase by the addition of nocodazole, and released into medium as synchronously progressing cells. Two peaks of an increase in the nuclear PI-PLC activities were detected; an early peak reached a maximum at 1 h after release from the nocodazole block, and a second increase was detected at 8.5 h after the release. Immunoprecipitation studies indicated that the increase in the activity was due to the activation of the nuclear PI-PLC-ß1. Western blot analysis demonstrated no changes in the level of both a and b splicing variants of PI-PLC-ß1 in the nuclei of cells isolated at either 1 h or 8.5 h after the block. However, an increase in the serine-phosphorylation of PI-PLC-ß1b was detected in the nuclei of HL-60 cells isolated at 1 and 8.5 h after the block, and the presence of MEK-inhibitor PD98059 completely inhibited both the serine phosphorylation and the increase in the PI-PLC activities in vitro. The presence of PI-PLC inhibitor prevented the progression of HL-60 cells through the G1 into S phase of the cell cycle. These results demonstrate that two peaks of nuclear PI-PLC activities, which are due to a PD98059-sensitive phosphorylation of nuclear PLC-ß1b on serine, occur at the G2/M and late G1 phase and are necessary for the progression of the cells through the cell cycle.
4-Hydroxynonenal (HNE), a highly reactive product of lipid peroxidation, has an antiproliferative effect in several tumor cell lines and provokes alteration of cell cycle progression in HL-60 cells. HNE down-regulates c-myc expression in K562, HL-60, and MEL cells. This prompted us to study the cascade of phenomena that, starting from the CKIs expression and the phosphorylation of pRb, arrives at the E2F binding to consensus sequence in the P2 promoter of the c-myc gene. Treatment of HL-60 cells with HNE (1 µM) causes a p53-independent increase of p21WAF1/CIP1 expression, pRb dephosphorylation, a decrease of low molecular weight E2F complexes and an increase of high molecular weight E2F complexes bound to P2 c-myc promoter. E2F4 expression is reduced by HNE treatment as well as the amount of pRb/E2F4 complexes, whereas the amount of pRb/E2F1 complexes is increased. In conclusion, HNE can affect the pRb/E2F pathway by modifying the expression of several genes involved in the control of cell proliferation.
The secosteroid hormone 1,25(OH)2D3 has a role in normal hematopoiesis, enhancing the activity of monocytes–macrophages differentiation. It also has anti-proliferative and pro-differentiation effects against various myeloid leukemia cell lines by both genomic and non-genomic pathways. Nevertheless, hematopoiesis in vitamin D3 receptor deletional mice is fairly normal, suggesting the vitamin D3 pathway has an adjunctive role in blood formation in mammals. The anti-proliferative activities of 1,25(OH)2D3 in vivo require supraphysiological levels of the secosteroid. Limited clinical trials with 1,25(OH)2D3 have been performed for the treatment of preleukemia/myelodysplastic syndrome; but the in vitro effective dose caused hypercalcemia in vivo. Since the mid-1980s, many vitamin D analogs have been synthesized that possess reduced hypercalcemic activity and increased ability to induce cell differentiation and to inhibit proliferation of leukemic cells. Further studies have been performed in vitro and in vivo using these analogs with other differentiating and/or anti-proliferative agents in the hopes that their combination, working through different pathways, could lead to synergistic activity. Proof of principle that 1,25(OH)2D3 and its analogs are beneficial in leukemia has been shown in experiments conducted in vitro and in laboratory animals, but to date their therapeutic value in patients is unproven. Of interest, 1,25(OH)2D3 and its analogs can stimulate synthesis of cathelicidin antimicrobial peptide and ß-defensins in myeloid cells in humans and may represent an evolutionarily important pathway to protect humans against microbes.
We have previously shown that pretreatment of mouse erythroleukemia (MEL) cells with the fluorinated pyrimidines 5-fluorouraciI (FUra) or 5-fluorodeoxyuridine (FUdR) followed by the differentiation inducer hexamethylene bisacetamide (HMBA) greatly enhanced the magnitude of their differentiation and caused extensive cell death. We have now extended these studies to address the mechanism that may be responsible for this enhancement and have also examined a human leukemic cell line (HL-60) for its sensitivity to this combination cytotoxic-differentiation therapy. We found that in HL-60 cells, pretreatment with FUdR, but not FUra, followed by 1.2% dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) led to an 8 to 10-fold enhancement of cell death as compared to FUdR alone. When all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) was used instead of DMSO, the enhancement of differentiation and cytotoxicity was 5-fold. The percent of cells induced to differentiate was dependent on the concentration of both FUdR and ATRA. In HL-60 cells resistant to ATRA-induced differentiation, the combination of FUdR and ATRA did not result in enhanced cytotoxicity. Leucovorin (LV), a compound known to enhance the inhibitory effect of FUra or FUdR on DNA synthesis, increased the effectiveness of the cytotoxic-differentiation therapy, whereas thymidine inhibited its effectiveness. This suggests that inhibition of DNA metabolism may be an integral part of the differentiation-enhancing cytotoxic mechanism. To further explore inhibition of DNA synthesis, DNA was extracted under alkaline on neutral conditions from 3H-thymidine-labelled cells that were treated with FUra/LV and HMBA individually or in combination. The emergence of single and double-strand DNA breaks was monitored by agarose gel electrophoresis. In parallel to the enhancement of cytotoxicity, the combination treatment (FUra/LV followed by HMBA) also produced a 2.5-3-fold increase in the DNA breaks when compared to the same effect obtained by the agents applied individually. Thus, we propose that DNA degradation may be the mechanism responsible for the enhanced loss of cell viability. In summary, we report here an approach which is targeted to increasing the death rate of leukemic cells through the combined use of low doses of cytotoxic drugs and differentiation inducers.
Growth in the presence of retinoids was found to induce erythroid differentiation in Friend murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells in culture. The program of differentiated functions expressed by retinoid-treated cells was quite similar to that promoted by other inducers of MEL cell differentiation. For example, 70% or more of induced cells synthesized hemoglobin which accumulated to a level of 8 µg–10 µg per 106 cells. The level of acetylcholinesterase activity increased two to five-fold in induced cells, and induction by retinoids, like induction by dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), promoted the appearance of cell surface lumps or ‘blebs’. All-trans retinaldehyde, which promoted maximum hemoglobin and acetylcholinesterase synthesis at a concentration of 5 × 10-7 M, was found to be a more potent inducer than all-trans retinoic acid or retinol, which both showed maximum induction at 1 × 10-5 M. Like differentiation promoted by DMSO, retinoid-induced differentiation was inhibited by 10-7 M dexamethasone.
Murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells provide a valuable model system for uncovering the cellular and molecular mechanisms of differentiation of proerythroid cells in culture. In order to characterize genes and gene expression patterns unique for erythropoiesis, we: (i) cloned and sequenced a 226 bp cDNA encoding portion of the 3'-end B22 subunit of mitochondrial NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I); (ii) assessed the steady state level of RNA transcripts encoded by B22, cytochrome c oxidase (COX II, COX IV) and c-myc genes in MEL cells undergoing terminal differentiation induced by dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) and/or 2-(3-ethylureido)-6-methylpyridine; and (iii) investigated whether the gene expression patterns of B22, COX IV and c-myc genes seen in differentiating cells are affected by N6-methyladenosine, an inhibitor of commitment and RNA methylation. These studies have indicated: (a) c-myc, COX II and COX IV genes exhibited biphasic expression pattern; a transient accumulation of c-myc, COX II and COX IV mRNAs was followed by a decline after 36 hr incubation with DMSO and/or 2-(3-ethylureido)-6-methylpyridine, (b) B22 gene expression declined progressively in differentiated cells, (c) blockade of differentiation of MEL cells with N6-methyladenosine failed to prevent the transient accumulation of c-myc, COX II and COX IV mRNAs, but abrogated the irreversible expression of all four genes. These findings indicated that B22, c-myc, COX II and COX IV genes are gradually repressed in terminally differentiating MEL cells presumably via different patterns of expression (gradual vs. biphasic). Overall, these results showed that erythroid maturation of MEL cells is accompanied by transcriptional inactivation (or repression) of at least three genes encoding mitochondrial enzyme subunits involved in cell respiration.
Treatment of cultured murine erythroleukemia (MEL or Friend) cells with N6-methylated derivatives of adenosine inhibited erythroid cell differentiation induced by various agents. N6-Methyladenosine (N6mAdo) inhibited initiation of commitment to terminal maturation and prevented accumulation of hemoglobin in a concentration-dependent manner. Treatment with N6mAdo slowed cell growth without causing substantial inhibition in the rate of DNA synthesis and a marked decrease in viability and clonogenic potential of MEL cells. Furthermore, N6mAdo decreased the cytoplasmic accumulation of ßmajor globin mRNA and affected its structural integrity in MEL cells. Cells preexposed to N6mAdo failed to initiate commitment as early as control cells upon challenge with the inducer dimethyl sulfoxide. N6mAdo-induced inhibition of commitment was not reversed but rather was potentiated by the presence of adenine, l-homocysteine and/or l-methionine, agents involved in the active methylation cycle. To this respect, N6mAdo-induced inhibition of commitment was found to be different from that caused by cordycepin (3'-deoxyadenosine, an inhibitor of RNA methylation and mRNA polyadenylation). The latter inhibition was fully reversed by the addition of l-methionine. These findings indicate that N6-methyladenosine: (a) blocks a central process that is required for initiation of commitment; and (b) decreases accumulation of ßmajor globin mRNA, causes mRNA degradation and prevents hemoglobin synthesis. Due to the differential sensitivity of N6mAdo- and cordycepin-induced blockade of commitment to l-methionine, these agents inhibit commitment by acting via two different mechanisms impinging on the final pathway of MEL erythroid cell maturation.
The uptake of a fluorescent derivative of a fatty acid (FDFA), 12-(1-pyrene) dodecanoic acid (P12) by murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells was studied. Because of the intense fluorescence of the pyrene ring, the association of P12 with intact cells could be analysed using a fluorescence microscope or a fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS), and the incorporation of P12 into cellular lipids could be quantified, following their extraction in a spectrofluorimeter. These procedures indicated that P12 uptake and intracellular utilization are reduced, following induction of erythrodifferentiation by dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) or hexamethylene-bis-acetamide (HMBA). The differences in the fluorescence observed following exposure to P12 permitted us to separate a mixture of differentiated and undifferentiated cells into two distinct cell subpopulations; the high fluorescence population consisted mainly of undifferentiated cells, and the low one of differentiated cells. The results of this study suggest that fluorescent fatty acids are useful for distinguishing between and sorting cells at different stages of differentiation.
We describe the isolation and characterization of a cDNA encoding the mouse S5 ribosomal protein. It was isolated from a MEL (murine erythroleukemia) cell cDNA library by differential hybridization as a down regulated sequence during HMBA-induced differentiation. Northern series analysis showed that S5 mRNA expression is reduced 5-fold throughout the differentiation process. The mouse S5 mRNA is 760 bp long and encodes for a 204 amino acid protein with 94% homology with the human and rat S5.
A procedure is described for the continuous monitoring and recording of fatty acid transport into cultured cells. Uptake of the fluorescent fatty acid derivative, 12-(1-pyrene)dodecanoic acid [P12] by a suspension of human promyelocytic leukemia (HL-60) cells was analyzed and recorded by the Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorter (FACS). A major advantage of the FACS is its ability for measuring the fluorescence of the cells only, without interference by that of the fatty acids dissolved or dispersed in the medium or complexed with serum albumin. The time-dependent fluorescence increase due to uptake of the acid by the cells could thus be monitored and recorded directly without a need for sedimenting, washing and extracting the cellular lipids. This procedure provided an accurate measurement of the kinetics of uptake of the fatty acid into the cells and permitted study of the effect of various parameters such as temperature, glucose, albumin or serum. The results indicated a biphasic uptake of P12 into the cells. The first, a rapid, energy-independent phase, lasted 3–4 min. This was followed by a slower uptake which was directly related to the metabolic utilization of the acid in the cells. This second phase represents the overall process of translocation across the cell membrane, activation to acyl coenzyme A and incorporation into the cellular neutral lipids and phosphoglycerides. When compared to HL-60, murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells took up considerably lesser quantities of P12. This was utilized for setting up a model system, in which mixtures of these two respective cell types could be identified and separated from each other on the basis of their relative rates of uptake of the fluorescent fatty acid.
Treatment of human myeloid leukemic cells with phorbol esters such as 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) is associated with activation and then partial down-regulation of protein kinase C activity. Previous work has suggested that the activation of protein kinase C by TPA contributes to the decrease in c-myc expression during differentiation of these cells. The present studies demonstrate that the decline in c-myc mRNA levels following exposure of HL-60 cells to TPA is preceded by an increase in expression of this gene. In contrast, exposure of HL-60 cells to inhibitors of protein kinase C activity is associated with down-modulation of c-myc expression. Similar findings have been obtained in U-937 myeloid leukemia cells. Taken together, these findings suggest that phorbol esters have a biphasic effect on c-myc expression. Whereas the activation of protein kinase C by phorbol esters may be associated with an increase in c-myc gene expression, the subsequent partial down-regulation of kinase activity may initiate a cascade of events resulting in the down-modulation of c-myc expression.
To clarify the role of protein kinase C and protein kinase A in cell proliferation and differentiation, the effects of K252a and its derivatives (K252b, KT5720), which have different inhibitory activity to these protein kinases, on the proliferation and differentiation of HL-60 cells were investigated. The proliferation and DNA synthesis of the HL-60 cells were inhibited by K252a in a dose dependent manner. However, K252b and KT5720 which are more specific inhibitors of protein kinase C or protein kinase A, respectively, had no observable effect on cell proliferation. K252a (40nM) enhanced the differentiation of HL-60 cells induced by 1,25(OH)2D3, retinoic acid and DMSO. K252b and KT5720 did not affect 1,25(OH)2D3-induced differentiation. K252a significantly inhibited the differentiation induced by PMA. These results demonstrate that K252a but not its derivatives can function as an antitumor drug and enhancer of the differentiation induced by various inducers.
The myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) continue to pose conceptual and practical conundrums because of their heterogeneity and therapeutic challenges. They are not restricted to the presence of clonal cells that are prone to excessive proliferation and premature apoptosis. In MDS the bone marrow microenvironment also is abnormal and exhibits an excess of proinflammatory cytokines, especially tumor necrosis factor (TNF), neoangiogenesis, and poorly defined immune defects. Thalidomide, a drug with anti-TNF, antiangiogenic, and immunomodulatory activities, and other agents with anti-TNF effects, such as pentoxifylline, etanercept, and infliximab, have produced hematologic improvement in 20% to 40% of patients. These agents may provide effective therapy for a subset of lower-risk MDS patients, even if the drugs target the bone marrow microenvironment predominantly. However, in higher-risk MDS patients, especially those with more than 10% blasts, it is important to eliminate abnormal cell clones; drugs used for this purpose have included arsenic trioxide, topotecan, the farnesyl transferase inhibitor tipifarnib, and demethylating agents, such as 5-azacytidine and decitabine. To increase the therapeutic index, a combination strategy may be preferable for higher-risk MDS patients, in whom the seed (clone) and the soil (bone marrow microenvironment) must be targeted simultaneously. The challenge is to recognize the subset that is likely to respond to a given drug so that patients can be preselected for therapy.
Maturation and aging of erythroid cells are accompanied by extensive remodeling of the membrane and a marked decrease in cell size, processes that are mediated by externalization and shedding of phosphatidylserine (PS). In the present study, we investigated the redistribution of PS in the plasma membrane of erythroid precursors during their maturation and of mature RBCs during senescence, and the involvement of changes in calcium (Ca)-flux in these processes. Maturation was studied by analyzing normal human bone marrow cells as well as cultured human normal erythroid precursors induced by erythropoietin and murine erythroleukemia cells induced by hexamethylene-bisacetamide. Senescence was studied in normal human peripheral RBCs following density fractionation. PS and Ca were determined by flow cytometry using annexin-V and Flu-3, respectively. The outer, inner and shed PS were quantified by a novel two-step binding inhibitory assay. The results indicate a bi-phasic modulation of intracellular Ca and PS externalization/shedding; both of which decreased during maturation and increased during aging. The role of intracellular Ca in PS externalization/shedding was demonstrated by modulating intracellular Ca: Ca was decreased by incubating the cells with an ion chelator (EDTA) or with decreasing concentrations of Ca, whereas treatment with the ionophore A23187 elevated intracellular Ca. The results showed that low Ca resulted in decreased outer and shed PS, whereas high Ca had the opposite effect. The results suggest that PS externalization and shedding are mediated by increased cellular Ca-flux, and that they play an important role in erythroid maturation and RBC senescence.
Differentiation therapy with all-trans retinoic acid has been a very successful therapeutic strategy in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), but the value of differentiation therapy in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) remains to be determined. A number of current treatments, such as tyrosine kinase inhibitors, cytokines, and epigenetic agents, induce differentiation of leukemic cells to some extent, but differentiation is not the main goal of these treatments. Forcing expression of certain transcription factors, such as C/EBP, has also been useful in inducing differentiation in cell lines and in murine models, but an effective way to force expression of these genes in humans is yet to be discovered.
During the past years, several independent laboratories have highlighted the presence of nuclear signaling pathways based on lipid hydrolysis, which are not a mere duplication of those occurring at the plasma membrane. Among the enzymes of the cycle, nuclear phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C (PI-PLC) has been analyzed quite extensively. In this context, PI-PLCß1 appears to play a key role as a check point in the G1 phase of the cell cycle. It has also been shown that its activation and/or up-regulation is upon the control of type 1 insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF-R) in both mouse fibroblast and myoblasts, suggesting that its signaling activity is essential for the normal behavior of the cell, at least in culture. The recent discovery of a possible involvement of the deletion of PI-PLCß1 gene in the progression of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) to acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in humans strengthens the contention that nuclear PI-PLC signaling is essential for physiogical processes such as cell growth and differentiation. Even though PI-PLCß1 is present and does not translocate to eukaryotic nuclei, this organelle, even though only in some conditions contains also PI-PLC?1 which acts not only as a PI-PLC but also as guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) for PI 3-kinase enhancer (PIKE) and is somehow linked to PI 3-kinase (PI3K) activity. Also members of PI-PLCd family are shuttling from the nucleus to the cytoplasm and return and are possibly involved in the control of cell growth. We must also take into account the presence in the nucleus of other phospholipases such as phospholipase A2 (PLA2) and phospholipase D (PLD), which also exert a signaling activity upon external stimuli. On the whole this review highlights the latest development in the PI-PLC cycle in the nucleus, which in terms of activation, regulation and down-stream targets differs substantially from that located at the plasma membrane.
The heterotrimeric G-protein a-chain Gap plays a critical role mediating receptor-linked activation of the ß isoforms of PLC which hydrolyse membrane inositol-containing phospholipids to generate the second messengers inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate and diacylglycerol. Despite knowledge of the three-dimensional structure of two G-protein a-chains (Gat and Ga1 as well as high regional amino acid conservation between members of the G-protein a-chain family, the precise molecular domains of Gap mediating activation of PLCß1 are unknown. To map sites responsible for effector interaction we employed 188 peptides each of 15 residues and corresponding to overlapping regions of the complete Gaq sequence. These were tested for their ability to inhibit Gaq-dependent activation of recombinant PLCJß1 using an in vitro reconstitution assay. Peptides from two regions of Gaq mediated up to 100% inhibition of GTP?S-stimulated PLCß1 activity, and representative peptides from each of these regions were half-maximally effective at 69.3 ± 27.4 µM (n = 4) (Gaq: 251–265) and 110.0 ± 41.9 µM (n = 4) (Gaq: 306–319). Gaq regions described by inhibitory peptides are conserved selectively in other G-protein a-chains linked to PLCß1 activation (Ga11, Ga4) and correspond spatially to sites of effector interaction identified in Gas by scanning mutagenesis and in transducin using site-specific antibodies and peptides. Computer homology modelling of Gaq based on the crystal structure of transducin indicates that regions interacting with PLCß1 form two parallel a-helices lying at the surface of the Gaq structure. These observations provide the first description of two regions within Gaq critically important for activating PLCß1, and moreover, indicate that effector binding domains identified in transducin and Gas are also conserved spatially in Gaq.
The changes in electrophoretic distribution of cytosolic protein kinases have been studied in relation to proliferation, differentiation and transformation in murine erythroleukaemic cells, using a non-denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis system. Native molecular masses of the major forms were determined by Ferguson plots.A two dimensional electrophoresis method was developed for determination of the subunit molecular masses. These studies suggest that the major bands of activity contain components which may correspond to cGMP dependent protein kinase, cAMP dependent protein kinase and protein kinase C. On hexamethylene bisacetamide induced differentiation of the cells, changes in proportions of the different forms were observed.
In recent years, it has become evident that lipid peroxidation is not only a mechanism for deterioration of alimentary oils and fats, but can occur even in living cells, both in pathological and physiological conditions. Through its aldehydic products, it can regulate several cellular processes, as proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis of normal and neoplastic cells. In this review we describe some recent findings obtained in these fields.
The biologically active form of vitamin D, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 [1,25(OH)2D3,] possess in vitro multiple anti-cancer activities including growth arrest, induction of apoptosis and differentiation of a variety of different types of malignant cells. However, its use as a therapeutic agent is hindered by its calcemic effects. Analogs of 1,25(OH)2D3 have enhanced anti-tumor activity, with reduced calcemic effects. However, limited clinical studies using vitamin D compounds have not yet achieved major clinical success. Nevertheless, pre-clinical studies suggest that the combination of either 1,25(OH)2D3 or its analogs with other agents can have additive or synergistic anti-cancer activities, suggesting future clinical studies.
Over the last years, evidence has suggested that phosphoinositides, which are involved in the regulation of a large variety of cellular processes both in the cytoplasm and in the plasma membrane, are present also within the nucleus. A number of advances has resulted in the discovery that phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C signalling in the nucleus is involved in cell growth and differentiation. Remarkably, the nuclear inositide metabolism is regulated independently from that present elsewhere in the cell. Even though nuclear inositol lipids hydrolysis generates second messengers such as diacylglycerol and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate, it is becoming increasingly clear that in the nucleus polyphosphoinositides may act by themselves to influence pre-mRNA splicing and chromatin structure. Among phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C, the ß1 isoform appears to be one of the key players of the nuclear lipid signaling. This review aims at highlighting the most significant and up-dated findings about phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C ß1 in the nucleus.
Dynamic regulation of chromatin structure is thought to be a prerequisite for nuclear functions that require accessibility to DNA such as replication, transcription and DNA repair. The phosphoinositide (PI) pathway is a second messenger signalling system regulated in response to a variety of extracellular (growth factors, differentiation signals) and intracellular (cell cycle progression, DNA damage) stimuli. The presence of a PI pathway in the nucleus together with the recent findings that specific nuclear proteins can interact with and are regulated by phosphoinositides suggest that changes in the nuclear phosphoinositide profile may have a direct role in modulating chromatin structure.
Changes in the relative abundances of c–myc mRNA have been related to changes in other parameters of differentiation (histochemical, clonogenic) during the course of the differentiation of HL60 cells to monocytes/ macrophages or to granulocytes. Induction of differentiation to monocytes /macrophages was marked by a rapid rale of appearance of committed cells (80 to 90% in 24 hours) and a concomitant rapid loss ofc–niyc mRNA. Induction of granulocytic differentiation resulted in a much slower rate of appearance of committed cells (50% in 48 hours), and a much faster rate of loss of c–/mr mRNA (tenfold in 1 hour). These data are consistent with there being a direct link between down–regulation of the expression of c–myc and the onset of proliferation arrest and monocytic differentiation, but show there is no such association of c–myc mRNA abundance and proliferation or differentiation during the maturation of HL60 granulocytes.
Imbalances in cancer cell redox homeostasis provide a platform for new opportunities in the development of anticancer drugs. The control of severe dose-limiting toxicities associated with redox regulation, including myelosuppression and immunosuppression, remains a challenge. Recent evidence implicates a critical role for redox regulation and thiol balance in pathways that control myeloproliferation, hematopoietic progenitor cell mobilization, and immune response. Hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) self-renewal and differentiation are dependent upon levels of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) and niche microenvironments. Redox status and the equilibrium of free thiol:disulfide couples are important in modulating immune response and lymphocyte activation, proliferation and differentiation. This subject matter is the focus of the present review. The potential of redox modulating chemotherapeutics as myeloproliferative and immunomodulatory agents is also covered.
Mouse (erythroleukemia, TSA8, and FM3A) cells and human (HeLa and HL-60) cells were pulse-labeled with [3H]thymidine and covalently closed circular DNA in the extrachromosomal fraction was analyzed by fluorography following polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Two discrete bands for mouse and at least one, different, band for human cells emerged in the position to which small circular DNA (less than 1 kb) migrate, suggesting there to be species-specific, preferentially labeled, small circular DNA in mammalian cells. The incorporation of [3H]-thymidine into the DNA was inhibited by cycloheximide but unaffected by aphidicolin. Restriction enzyme (AluI) digestion of the DNA fraction from MEL cells produced approximately 120-, 100-, and 50-bp labeled DNA fragments. The origin of the pulse-labeled DNAs is discussed.
The rapid redistribution of cytosolic protein kinase C (PKC) to membranes and its subsequent proteolytic activation to PKM have been implicated in the DMSO/HMBA-induced differentiation of murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells. However, DMSO was found not to induce detectable changes in PKC distribution in a MEL cell subline (MEL1) which differentiated normally in response to the agent. Nevertheless, the differentiation of MEL cells appeared dependent on an early PKC-related event because hemoglobinization was partially blocked by the PKC inhibitor H-7 added to cells within the first 2 h after DMSO induction. Indeed, a rapid (15–60 min) increase in membrane PKC activity was detected in DMSO-treated MEL1 cells using a novel method which quantitates the amount of ‘active’ PKC in intact membranes. This transient PKC increase resulted from the activation of ‘inactive’ enzyme already associated with membranes, and not from the translocation of cytosolic PKC. Conventional PKC assays cannot distinguish between active and inactive membrane PKC pools. DMSO also activated inactive membrane PKC in HL-60 cells, but not in S49T-lymphoma and WEHI-231 B-lymphoma cells which do not differentiate in response to DMSO. The results suggest that a rapid and transient increase in membrane PKC activity may be an important early step in DMSO-induced differentiation of erythroleukemia cells.
In higher vertebrates, different types of blood cells develop from common precursors. Mammals are unique in possessing two types of blood cells — erythrocytes and platelets — which lack nuclei. Although platelets display consistent and easily-recognisble morphological and ultrastructural characteristics and show exreme metabolic and functional versatility, they are not true cells, being produced by fragmentation of giant polyploid precursors called megakaryocytes. At present, the physiological mechanisms which regulate megakaryocyte development and platelet production are not well understood. Platelets are actively involved in metabolism of purine derivatives and a significant platelet role in pyrimidine metabolism has also been demonstrated (see previous papers). Here an attempt is made to integrate information about platelet involvement in nucleic precursor metabolism with current concepts of haematopoiesis, particularly megakaryocyte development and platelet production. It is concluded (i) that megakaryocytic cels are immediate descendents of haematopoietic stem cells which have become polyploid as a result of genetic damage or metabolic imbalances, (ii) megakaryocytes and platelets are the ultimate regulators of stem cell development because they control the availability of thymidine and (iii) that the production of megakaryocytes and platelets is a physiological safety mechanism which prevents fixation of genetic damage and protects other cells from potentially cytotoxic and genotoxic stimuli.
It has been suggested that increased intramedullary apoptosis may explain the paradox between peripheral blood cytopenias and the hyper- or normo-cellular bone marrow observed in the myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). We wished to see if culture performance could be related to the presence of apoptotic cells in a group of patients with MDS (12 patients) and other patients with peripheral blood cytopenias (six patients) which caused diagnostic difficulty. There was no correlation between LTBMC or adherent cell growth and the presence of apoptotic cells in the original marrow sample. A variable degree of apoptosis was observed in both groups of patients. LTBMC profiles correlated well with diagnosis but were unrelated to the extent of intramedullary apoptosis. This suggests that apoptosis is a much more ubiquitous process in disease than previously thought.
To study the therapeutic effect of low-dose aclarubicin (ACR), we carried out comparative treatment of 15 patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and atypical leukemia using this drug. Complete remission (CR) was achieved in three patients with RAEB-t and one patient with AML, partial remission was obtained in one patient with RAEB and hematological improvement in one patient with refractory anemia (RA). Interestingly, prolonged CR for more than 26 months with persistent chromosomal abnormalities was observed in a case of AML, which progressed from RA. Myelosuppression caused by low-dose ACR was milder than that caused by low-dose Ara-C. Furthermore, in vitro studies indicated that ACR induced differentiation of bone marrow cells from one patient with MDS. From these observations, it is suggested that low-dose ACR may be an alternative to low-dose Ara-C for treatment of MDS, and that the in vivo effect of ACR may be mediated by the differentiation of abnormal hemopoietic clones.
The present studies have examined the effects of hexamethylene bisacetamide (HMBA) on the human U-937 monocytic cell line. HMBA treatment was associated with: (1) decreases in U-937 cell proliferation, (2) increases in nonspecific esterase activity and cell surface antigen expression consistent with monocytic differentiation, (3) decreases in c-myc gene expression, and (4) induction of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) transcripts. Treatment of U-937 cells with HMBA was also associated with increases in phospholipase A2 activity and increases in the release of arachidonic acid and its metabolites. Dexamethasone, an agent previously shown to inhibit monocytic differentiation, had no detectable effect on the down-regulation of c-myc, but blocked the induction of TNF expression. Taken together, the results demonstrate that HMBA induces monocytic differentiation of U-937 cells and that this effect is sensitive, in part, to dexamethasone.
Pyrene dodecanoic acid (P12), a medium-chain fatty acid to which the fluorescent probe pyrene is covalently linked, showed a considerable increase in fluorescence when the probe was introduced into a hydrophobic environment. Also, when closely packed in an aggregate, an energy transfer between two adjacent molecules of pyrene occurred, resulting in a shift of the peak of the emission spectrum from 378 nm (‘monomeric’) to 475 nm (‘excimeric’). These two respective properties were utilized for the following: (a) A spectrofluorometric measurement of the critical micellar concentration (CMC) of the pyrene fatty acid, defined as the concentration at which the 475 nm emission peak appeared as a consequence of the aggregation of P12 molecules in aqueous solution to form micelles; the CMC of P12 was found to be in the range of 1 to 2 µM. (b) The penetration of P12, from an aqueous solution or dispersion, into unilamellar phospholipid vesicles was determined by monitoring the increase of the fluorescence at 378 nm. The fluorescence increase was time-dependent and proportional to the respective concentrations of P12 or phospholipid vesicles. Substituting the neutral phosphatidylcholine with the negatively-charged phosphatidylserine vesicles resulted in a slower rate as well as lesser total uptake of P12. (c) The uptake of P12 by cells was accompanied by an increase in the monomeric fluorescence emission intensity. Using cells in suspension, this could be followed continuously in a spectrofluorometer equipped with a recorder. The uptake was found to be time-dependent and proportional to P12 concentration.
Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA), N,N'-hexamethylenebisacetamide (HMBA) and retinoic acid induce cell differentiation in U-937 promonocytic cells. This report examines the effects of these agents on DNA topoisomerase I activity. A decrease in enzyme activity could be detected as early as 30 min after treatment with all three differentiating compounds and lasted at least 48 h. No alteration in the levels of DNA topoisomerase I transcript or protein was observed during these treatments. The results might be explained by post-translational events that render DNA topoisomerase type I less active.
Several studies point to the existence of an inverse correlation between cellular lipid peroxidation and both cell proliferation and neoplastic transformation. In anaplastic cell lines products of membrane lipid peroxidation are very low or undetectable. Furthermore numerous results demonstrate effect of lipid peroxidation products on central biochemical pathways and intracellular signalling at physiological concentrations. 4-hydroxynonenal (HNE) is one of the most active products of lipid peroxidation. The restoration of HNE physiological concentrations in neoplastic cells may inhibit cell proliferation and modulate cell re-differentiation. This review try to summarize and critically discuss the effects of physiological concentrations of HNE on normal and neoplastic cell line.
To examine whether protein kinase C (PKC) plays a role in mediating growth inhibitory effects of hexamethylene bisacetamide (HMBA) we compared a control H29 colon cancer cell line to a derivative, HT29-PKC7, that overexpresses high levels of PKCß1. We found that although HMBA markedly inhibited the growth of the control cells, no inhibition was seen with the HT29-PKC7 cells. On the other hand the tumor promoter 12-0-tetradecanoyl-phorbol-13 acetate inhibited the growth of HT29-PKC7 cells, but no inhibition was seen with the control cells. Maximum inhibition of the growth of both cell lines was obtained by combined treatment with HMBA and TPA. These results may be relevant to the use of HMBA in combination with other agents in the therapy of specific cancers.
Polyclonal anti-serum made against murine glycophorin gp3 (agp) recognizes the endothelial albumin binding glycoprotein, gp60. In this study, we investigated the nature (peptide vs. carbohydrate) of the common epitope. First, a new technique was developed to remove oligosaccharides from glycoproteins that were first immobilized on filters and then subjected to ß-elimination. When greater than 90% of the glycans of gp60 were removed, agp still recognized gp60 without apparent loss of affinity. Second, we used brefeldin A to accumulate unglycosylated glycophorin precursors in order to affinity-purify peptide-specific agp immuno-globulins; these antibodies recognized gp60. Finally, agp recognized from in vitro translations a 48 kDa putative polypeptide precursor of gp60. These different approaches indicate that gp60 and gp3 have at least one common epitope in their peptide backbones.
We performed an open-labeled single-arm prospective phase II clinical trial of vitamin K2 (menatetrenone: VK2) monotherapy and VK2 plus 1a-hydroxyvitamin D3 (alfacalcidol: VD3) combination therapy for myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) with refractory anemia and refractory cytopenia with multilineage dysplasia, having either low or intermediate-1 risks of the IPSS. The overall response rate to VK2 monotherapy (45 mg/day) after 16 weeks was 13% (5/38) including 4 cases with improvement of both anemia and thrombocytopenia and 1 case with thrombocytopenia. We then enrolled and evaluated 20 out of 33 VK2-monotherapy non-responders for VK2 plus VD3 (0.75 µg/day) combination therapy. The overall response rate at 16 weeks after initiation of VK2 plus VD3 was 30% (6/20). HI for hemoglobin (Hb) was observed in 6 out of 11 patients (55%) and for thrombocytopenia in 3 out of 11 patients (27%), respectively. No HI was observed for neutropenia in VK2 monotherapy and VK2 plus VD3 combination therapy. It was suggested that IPSS scores and absolute neutrophil counts positively correlated, and Hb levels inversely correlated with the response to VK2 plus VD3 combination therapy. Our study demonstrated that VK2 plus VD3 combination therapy appears to be promising for improvement of anemia and thrombocytopenia with low/intermediate-1 MDS.
We present the first case of a myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) demonstrating an association between the appearance of double-minute chromosomes (dmin) and disease progression. This 59-year-old Japanese woman showed a deletion of the long arm of chromosome 5 [del(5)(q21q34)] and monosomy 9, when she was diagnosed as having refractory anemia with an excess of blasts (RAEB). Subsequential cytogenetic analyses demonstrated that the neoplastic cells in the peripheral blood had six copies of dmin, when the disease progressed into RAEB in transformation (RAEBt). This cytogenetic change was consistently observed when the patient developed the leukemia phase. The findings in this case suggest that the appearance of dmin may be linked to progression of the disease.
Cytogenetic analysis of bone marrow cells from a patient with myelodysplastic syndrome associated with eosinophilia showed a complex translocation with a 46,XYt(2;18;2)(p23;q11;q32) karyo-type. The patient has refractory anemia (RA) according to the French-American-British Cooperative Group (FAB) classification, and after 90 months of follow-up he shows no evidence of leukemic transformation. This chromosomal abnormality has not been previously described in myelodysplastic syndromes and may be associated with good prognosis as the patient has been stable for a long time.
An ATP assay using bioluminescence was evaluated for its ability in determining the cytotoxic effect of antileukemic drugs. Leukemic cells from 32 patients with ANLL were used to compare the ATP assay with the differential staining cytotoxicity assay (DiSC). Cells were incubated with doxorubicin, daunorubicin, idarubicin, mitoxantron and ara-C in conditions that were adapted to mimic the in vivo exposure of leukemic cells to cytostatic drugs. After incubation the cells were cultured in liquid medium for 4 days and then analyzed for ATP content using the firefly luciferase method in an automated procedure. The cytotoxic effect as measured by both methods correlated satisfactorily (r = 0.8). We conclude that the automated ATP assay can replace the more time consuming DiSC assay for in vitro drug testing in ANLL.
Differentiation induction therapy provides an alternative therapeutic approach for patients with acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) who are either unsuitable for or unresponsive to conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy. The effect of a triple combination of retinoic acid (RA) + 6-thioguanine (6-Th) + hexamethylene bisacetamide (HMBA) on differentiation of blasts from 24 AML patients was studied. Nonadherent mononuclear cells were seeded at a concentration of 5 × 105 cells/ml in 24-well tissue culture plates containing RPMI-1640 culture medium with 20% fetal calf serum and 10% 5637-conditioned medium and incubated with 10-6 M retinoic acid, 1.5 × 10-6M 6-thioguanine and/or 2 mM hexamethylene bisacetamide for six days at 37°C in a humidified incubator under 5% CO2. Morphological, cytochemical and functional differentiation into mature cells were induced in blasts from 22 out of the 24 AML patients following exposure to the triple combination of 10-6 M RA + 1.5 × 10-6 M 6-Th + 2 mM HMBA in primary culture. These effective results justify a clinical trial of such triple combination for AML patients who are either unsuitable for or unresponsive to conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy.
The ability of BAG3, a member of the BAG family of heat shock protein (Hsp) 70 — cochaperones, to sustain the survival of human primary B-CLL and ALL cells was recognized about nine years ago. Since then, the anti-apoptotic activity of BAG3 has been confirmed in other tumor types, where it has been shown to regulate the intracellular concentration and localization of apoptosis-regulating factors, including NF-?B-activating (IKK?) and Bcl2-family (Bax) proteins. Furthermore, growing evidences support its role in lymphoid and myeloid leukemia response to therapy. Moreover in the last years, the contribution of BAG3 to autophagy, a process known to be involved in the pathogenesis and response to therapy of leukemia cells, has been disclosed, opening a new avenue for the interpretation of the role of this protein in leukemias' biology.
Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) comprise a heterogenous group of clonal disorders of hematopoietic progenitors, showing genetic instability and in many cases progression to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). When MDS progress towards AML (AML/MDS), additional genetic lesions cause a block in differentiation and an accumulation of blast cells. Hence, both pathophysiologically and clinically the MDS and AML/MDS phases are distinguishable. Leukemia cell lines are key resources for modelling hematological malignancies. Characterization of these cell lines has provided a rich vein of insights into the mechanisms underlying malignant transformation. Some 31 cell lines have been described in the literature purportedly established from patients with MDS. However, a significant minority of these has proved false after DNA profiling which revealed their cross-contamination with older established leukemia cell lines. Most remaining (“authentic”) MDS cell lines were established during the leukemic phase of the disease progression rather than during the MDS phase. Based on these data we have assigned the 31 candidate MDS cell lines to one of the three categories: (1) false (cross-contaminated) cell lines and non-malignant cell lines; (2) malignant cell lines established in the AML/MDS leukemic phase; and (3) apparently legitimate MDS cell lines established during the MDS phase. While MDS and AML/MDS cell lines both provide singular resources for modelling pathology, mining oncogenically modified macromolecules, and testing druggability, we contend these groups should be considered separately.